Ticket #1194 Changes to doors and spikes
Changes made to improve iron spikes, and to give the player a possibility to lock doors:

1.
Weight of Iron Spike reduced to 0.2 lb
A spike should not weigh more than an arrow,
otherwise they will not be used by those who have use for them, weak characters
like mages that have low strength and would not be able to carry heavy spikes.
Strong warriors doesn't need to use spikes anyway, 
because they can kill everything on first sight.
Change in:
object.txt

2.
Fixed iron spike bug
Fixed a bug that made it possible to use an infinite amount of spikes on a door.
Changes in cmd2.c, in the function:
do_cmd_spike_test

3. Fixed another iron spike bug
The first spike now gives the door a power of one
Changes in cmd2.c, in the function:
do_cmd_spike

4.
Lock door
A closed, unlocked door can be locked by the player by using the disarm skill.
A skill test is made to create a chance of failure.
The new lock power is a random number 1-7.
Changes in cmd2.c, in the functions:
do_cmd_disarm_test
do_cmd_disarm
New function:
do_cmd_lock_door

5.
Remove experience from lockpicking doors
Reason: Since the player gains 1 exp from picking a door lock, 
repeatedly locking a door and then
unlocking it again can be exploited to gain experience and gain several levels.
The player still gets experience from disarming traps and lockpicking chests.
Changes in cmd2.c, in the function:
do_cmd_open_aux

6.
Damage from failed bash
A failed bash does 1-10 damge to the player instead of paralysis.
No message is given, though a message can be added if you think the player needs
to be informed of the lost hp.
Changes in cmd2.c, in the function:
do_cmd_bash_aux

7.
Monster unlocks door
When a monster picks the lock of a locked door, the lock power is reduced by one.
One can hear the monster fiddling with the lock. This is really fun.
The message is mostly for testing and should probably be removed
to reduce message spam.
Changes in melee2.c, in the function:
process_monster

8.
Monster bashes door
When a monster bashes a jammed door, the door power is reduced by one
One can hear something bump at the door.
The message is mostly for testing and should probably be removed
to reduce message spam. 
By putting in new spikes, the player can keep the door shut til he runs out of spikes.
This is really fun.
Changes in melee2.c, in the function:
process_monster

Note: A door cannot be both locked and jammed at the same time
Note: If a monster fails to pick a lock, it will try to bash the door instead
Note: There are 16 slots for closed doors, but only 15 are used:
1 for closed door, 7 for locked doors and 7 for jammed doors. This is confusing.

