
Greetings my friends and welcome to the world of mindless dribble.
This source code will enable you to spend countless hours staring
at your computer when you should be doing something more productive,
anything more productive.

You have a couple of options on how to get the borg running.  Be sure
to copy the file borg.txt into the angband\lib\user  directory.  On
my system, borg.txt is in c:\games\ang309\lib\user.

For those using Unix, you need to put it in a different directory.
The borg.txt file ought to be placed in the directory ~/.angband/Angband/ on Unix systems. 

Option one:  
Use the precompiled executable files and replace your
angband.exe or angband.scr files with the ones with this package.
1. copy the angband.exe and replace the existing one in your angband
   directory.  If using the screensaver, copy and replace the
   angband.scr in your windows directory.
2. If using screensaver, copy the angband.ini included with the screensaver
   zip file and put that in your windows directory as well.  Be sure to 
   edit it so it points to the correct location of your angband files.
   (See the notes below)
   

Option two:  Compile your own executable file using the borg source
     code provided in this package.  Follow the instructions below.

To install and compile this borg, you will need to do the following:
1.  Modify the config.h to uncomment:
        a. the allow_borg line
        b. the score_borg line
        c. the allow_borg_graphics line
2.  Modify the makefile to include the borg source files
3.  Make sure the file borg.txt is located in the \lib\user\ directory.
    Unless you are using unix.  Unix users must have it in a specially 
    named directory, but I don't remember what it is.
4.  Modify your borg.txt file if you want to run the borg in a particular
    fashion, including continuous play borgs.
5.  Compile
6.  Start the game, load up a character or make new one.
7.  Hit control z, read and ignore the messages, hit z again.
8.  Grab some popcorn and a soda, and watch your mind go numb.

The borg may get stuck in certain situations.  He may have a Clock Overflow.
He may loop buying and selling the same stuff over and over.  Believe me
when I say that these have been addressed.  His loops are greatly reduced.

Continuous Play Mode: (option)
Upon the death of a borg, he will automatically reroll a random character,
with a random name and start fresh from clevel 1.  To enable the Continuous
Play Mode, turn the game option cheat_live on.  To do that enter the
options by pressing the equal sign (=) then Cheat Options (6).

If you want, you can tell the borg to select a certain race and or class for
the next one rolled up.  You can make these selections from the borg.txt file.

The Continual Play Mode is NOT turned on by default, you will need to
select it.
