
                      The Pits of Angband
 
 
                        Alexander Cutler
                          Andy Astrand
 
 
              Based on 'The Dungeons of Moria' by
                     Robert Alan Koeneke
                       James E. Wilson
 
/*--------------------------------------------------------------------------*\
 
 
\*--------------------------------------------------------------------------*/
        
 
        Angband may be copied and modified freely,  but  may
     not be sold or marketed IN ANY FORM without the permis-
     sion and written consent of  the  authors  Robert  Alan
     Koeneke  and James E. Wilson.  We retain all copyrights
     to this program, in either  the  original  or  modified
     forms,  and  no  violation,  deletion, or change of the
     copyright notice is allowed.  Furthermore, we will have
     no liability or responsibility to any user with respect
     to loss or damage caused directly or indirectly by this
     program.
 
 
 
April 15, 1991
Last modified April 1, 1994
 
 
          1.  Introduction
 
          The game of  Angband is  a single player  dungeon  simulation.  A
          player  may choose from a number of races and classes when creat-
          ing a character, and then `run' that character over a  period  of
          days, weeks, even months, attempting to win the game by defeating
          Morgoth, the Lord of Darkness, who resides far below the surface.
 
          The player will begin his adventure on the town  level  where  he
          may acquire supplies, weapons, armor, and magical devices by bar-
          tering with various shop owners.  After preparing for his  adven-
          ture,  the  player  can  descend into the Pits of Angband where
          fantastic adventures await his coming!
 
          Before beginning your first adventure, you should read this docu-
          ment carefully.  The  game  of Angband is a complicated game, and
          will require a dedicated player to win.
 
 
          2.  The Character
 
          All characters have six main attributes which modify their  basic
          abilities.   These  six  attributes,  called stats, are strength,
          intelligence,  wisdom,  dexterity,  constitution,  and  charisma.
          Stats  may  vary  from a minimum of 3 to a maximum of 18.  At the
          highest level, stats are further qualified by a number from  zero
          to  one hundred, so that the highest value is actually 18/100.  A
          value of 18/100 can be thought of as equivalent to 19, and  18/00
          (not  actually used) is equivalent to 18. In Angband, it is also
          possible to increase these stats above 18/100 by magical means! 
          Because adventurers of interest tend to be better than average 
          characters,  Angband  stats will  average  about  13,  and  are 
          further adjusted by race and class.  Some races are just naturally
          better  at  being  certain classes, as will be shown later.
 
          In addition to the more visible stats, each character has certain
          abilities  which  are  mainly  determined by his race, class, and
          level, but are also modified by his  stats.   The  abilities  are
          fighting,  throwing/bows, saving throw, stealth, disarming, magi-
          cal devices, perception, searching, and infra-vision.
 
          Characters will be assigned an early history, with  money  and  a
          social  class  based on that history.  Starting money is assigned
          based on history, charisma, and somewhat upon the  average  of  a
          character's  stats.   A  character  with below average stats will
          receive extra money to help him survive the first adventure.
 
          Each character will also have physical attributes such  as  race,
          height,  weight, sex, and a physical description.  None of these,
          except weight, play any part in the game other than to  give  the
          player a "feeling" for his character.  Weight is used for comput-
          ing carrying capacity and also for bashing.
 
          Finally, each character is assigned hit  points  based  on  their
          race,  class,  and constitution.  Spell casters will also receive
          mana which is expended when casting spells.   Mana  is  based  on
          Wisdom for Priests and Intelligence for Magi.
 
 
          2.1.  Character Stats
 
          Strength
               Strength is important in fighting with weapons and  hand  to
               hand  combat.   A  high strength can improve your chances of
               hitting, and the amount of damage done with each hit.  Char-
               acters  with  low strengths may receive penalties.  Strength
               is also useful in tunneling, body and shield bashing, and in
               carrying heavy items.
 
          Intelligence
               Intelligence is the prime stat of a mage,  or  magician.   A
               high  intelligence  increases  a  mage's chances of learning
               spells, and it also increases the amount of mana a mage has.
               No spell may be learned by magi  with intelligences under 8.
               Intelligence also modifies a character's chance of disarming
               traps, picking locks, and using magic devices.
 
          Wisdom
               Wisdom is the  prime  stat  of  a  priest.   A  high  wisdom
               increases the chance of receiving new spells from a priest's
               deity, and it also increases the amount  of  mana  a  priest
               has.   No  spell may be learned by priests with wisdom under
               8.  Wisdom also modifies a character's chance  of  resisting
               magical spells cast upon his person.
 
          Dexterity
               Dexterity is a combination of agility and quickness.  A high
               dexterity  may  allow a character to get multiple blows with
               lighter weapons, thus greatly increasing his kill power, and
               may  increase  his  chances  of  hitting with any weapon and
               dodging blows from enemies.  Dexterity  is  also  useful  in
               picking locks, disarming traps, and protecting yourself from
               pick pockets.
 
          Constitution
               Constitution is a character's ability to  resist  damage  to
               his  body, and to recover from damage received.  Therefore a
               character with a high constitution  will  receive  more  hit
               points, and be more resistant to poisons.
 
          Charisma
               Charisma represents a character's personality,  as  well  as
               physical  looks.   A  character  with  a  high charisma will
               receive better prices from store owners, whereas a character
               with  a  very  low  charisma  will  be robbed blind.  A high
               charisma will also mean more starting money for the  charac-
               ter.
 
 
          2.2.  Character Sex
 
          You may choose to be either a male or a female  character.   Only
          height  and  weight  are  affected  by a character's sex.  Female
          characters tend to be somewhat smaller  and  lighter  than  their
          male counterparts.  No adjustments to stats or abilities are made
          because of the sex of a character.  Female characters  start  out
          with  slightly more money than male characters to help offset the
          weight penalty.
 
 
          2.3.  Character Abilities
 
          Characters possess nine different abilities which can  help  them
          to survive.  The starting abilities of a character are based upon
          race and class.  Abilities may be adjusted by high or low  stats,
          and may increase with the level of the character.
 
          Fighting
               Fighting is the ability to hit and do damage with weapons or
               fists.   Normally  a  character  gets a single blow from any
               weapon, but if his dexterity and strength are  high  enough,
               he  may  receive  more blows per round with lighter weapons.
               Strength and dexterity both modify the  ability  to  hit  an
               opponent.   This skill increases with the level of the char-
               acter.
 
          Throwing/Bows
               Using  ranged  missile  weapons  and  throwing  objects   is
               included  in this skill.  Different stats apply to different
               weapons, but this ability may modify the distance an  object
               is  thrown/fired, the amount of damage done, and the ability
               to hit a creature.  This skill increases with the  level  of
               the character.
 
          Saving Throw
               A Saving Throw is the ability of a character to  resist  the
               effects  of  a spell cast on him by another person/creature.
               This does not include spells cast on the player by  his  own
               stupidity,  such  as  quaffing a nasty potion.  This ability
               increases with the level of the  character,  but  then  most
               high  level  creatures  are  better at casting spells, so it
               tends to even out.  A high wisdom also increases this  abil-
               ity.
 
          Stealth
               The ability to move silently about is very useful.   Charac-
               ters with good stealth can usually surprise their opponents,
               gaining the first blow.  Also, creatures may fail to  notice
               a  stealthy  character  entirely, allowing a player to avoid
               certain fights.  This skill is based entirely upon race  and
               class, and will never improve unless magically enhanced.
 
          Disarming
               Disarming is the  ability  to  remove  traps  (safely),  and
               includes  picking  locks  on  traps and doors.  A successful
               disarming will gain the character some experience.   A  trap
               must  be  found  before  it  can be disarmed.  Dexterity and
               intelligence both modify the ability  to  disarm,  and  this
               ability increases with the level of the character.
 
          Using Magical Devices
               Using a magical device such as  a  wand  or  staff  requires
               experience  and  knowledge.   Spell  users such as magi  and
               priests are therefore much better at using a magical  device
               than say a warrior.  This skill is modified by intelligence,
               and increases with the level of the character.
 
          Perception
               Perception  is  the  ability  to  notice  something  without
               actively  seeking it out.  This skill is based entirely upon
               race and class, and  will  never  improve  unless  magically
               enhanced.
 
          Searching
               To search is to actively look for secret doors, floor traps,
               and  traps on chests.  Rogues are the best at searching, but
               magi,  rangers, and priests are also good at it.  This skill
               is  based  entirely  upon  race  and  class,  and will never
               improve unless magically enhanced.
 
          Infra-vision
               Infra-vision is the ability to see heat sources. Since  most
               of  the  dungeon is cool or cold, infra-vision will not allow
               the player to see walls and objects.  Infra-vision will allow
               a  character  to see any warm-blooded creatures up to a cer-
               tain distance.  This ability works equally well with or with
               out  a  light source.  The majority of Angband's creatures are
               cold-blooded, and will not be detected unless lit  up  by  a
               light  source.   All non human races have innate infra-vision
               ability.  Human can gain infra-vision only if it is magically
               enhanced.
 
 
          2.4.  Choosing A Race
 
          There  are  ten  different races  that  you  can  choose  from   in
          Angband.   Some races are restricted as to what profession they may
          be, and each race has its own adjustments to a character's  stats
          and abilities. Most races also have intrinsic abilities.
 
          Human
               The human is the base character, all other  races  are  com-
               pared to them.  Humans can choose any class, and are average
               at everything.  Humans tend to go up levels faster than  any
               other  race, because of their shorter life spans.  No racial
               adjustments or intrinsics occur to characters choosing human.
 
          Half-Elf
               Half-elves tend to be smarter and faster than a  human,  but
               not as strong.  Half-elves are slightly better at searching,
               disarming, perception, stealth, and magic, but they are  not
               as good at hand weapons.  Half-elves may choose any class.
               Half-elves do not get any intrinsic abilities.
 
          Elf
               Elves are better magicians then humans, but not as  good  at
               fighting.   They  tend  to be smarter and faster than either
               humans or half-elves, and also have  better  wisdom.   Elves
               are better at searching, disarming, perception, stealth, and
               magic, but they are not as good at hand weapons.  Elves  may
               choose any class except Paladin.  They resist light effects.
 
          Hobbits
               Hobbits, or Halflings, are very good at bows, throwing,  and
               have good saving throws.  They also are very good at search-
               ing, disarming, perception, and stealth; so they make excel-
               lent  thieves  (but  prefer to be called burglars...).  They
               will be much weaker than humans, and  no  good  at  bashing.
               Halflings  have  fair  infra-vision, so they can detect warm
               creatures at a distance.  Halflings can choose between being
               a  warrior,  mage,  or rogue.  Hobbits  have their dexterity 
               sustained.
 
          Gnome
               Gnomes are smaller than dwarfs, but larger  than  halflings.
               They,  like  the halflings, live in the earth in burrow-like
               homes.  Gnomes are practical jokers, so  if  they  can  kill
               something  in  a  humorous  way, so much the better.  Gnomes
               make excellent magi,  and  have  very  good  saving  throws.
               They  are  good  at  searching,  disarming,  perception, and
               stealth.  They have lower strength than humans so  they  are
               not  very  good  at fighting with hand weapons.  Gnomes have
               fair infra-vision, so they can detect warm  creatures  at  a
               distance.  A gnome may choose between being a warrior, mage,
               priest, or rogue.  All gnomes have intrinsic free action.
 
          Dwarf
               Dwarves are the headstrong miners and  fighters  of  legend.
               Since  dungeons  are  the  natural home of a dwarf, they are
               excellent choices for a warrior or priest.  Dwarves tend  to
               be  stronger  and  have higher constitutions, but are slower
               and less intelligent than humans.  Because they are so head-
               strong  and  are somewhat wise, they resist spells which are
               cast on them.  Dwarves also have good  infra-vision  because
               they  live  underground.   They  do  have  one  big drawback
               though.  Dwarves are loudmouthed and proud, singing in  loud
               voices,  arguing with themselves for no good reason, scream-
               ing out  challenges  at  imagined  foes.   In  other  words,
               dwarves  have  a  miserable  stealth.  Dwarves can  never be
               blinded. 
 
          Half-Orc
               Half-Orcs make excellent warriors, and decent  priests,  but
               are  terrible  at  magic.   They  are  as  bad as dwarves at
               stealth, and horrible at searching, disarming,  and  percep-
               tion.  Half-Orcs are, let's face it, ugly.  They tend to pay
               more for goods in town.  Half-Orcs do make good priests  and
               rogues,  for  the  simple reason that Half-Orcs tend to have
               great constitutions and lots of hit points. Because of their
               preference  to  living underground to on the  surface, half-
               orcs resist darkness attacks.
 
          Half-Troll
               Half-Trolls are incredibly strong, and have the highest  hit
               points of any character race.  They are also very stupid and
               slow.  They will make great warriors and iffy priests.  They
               are  bad  at  searching, disarming, perception, and stealth.
               They are so ugly that a Half-Orc grimaces in their presence.
               They also happen to be fun to run... Half-trolls always have
               their strength sustained.
 
          Dunadan
               Dunedain are a race of hardy men from the  west, this  elder
               race surpasses human abilities in  every  field,  especially
               constitution. However being men of the world, very little is
               new to them, and experience is very hard to gain...     They
               can  play  all  classes.  Their  constitution  can  never be 
               reduced.
 
          High-Elf
               High-elves are a race of immortal  beings  dating  from  the 
               beginning of time,  and find experience  extremely  hard  to
               gain.  They  are  masters  of  skills,  and are  strong  and 
               intelligent,  although their  wisdom  is  sometimes suspect. 
               They can play all classes except Paladin.   High-elves begin
               their lives  able to  see the  unseen,  and  they  cannot be
               harmed   by  falling small distances.
 
          2.4.1.  Race Versus Skills and Stats
 
          Stat, hit dice, and experience points per level modifications due
          to race are listed in the following table.
 
                      Str  Int  Wis  Dex  Con  Chr  Hit Dice  Rqd Exp/level
 
          Human        0    0    0    0    0    0      10          +0%
          Half-Elf    -1   +1    0   +1   -1   +1       9         +10%
          Elf         -1   +2   +1   +1   -2   +1       8         +20%
          Hobbit      -2   +2   +1   +3   +2   +1       7         +10%
          Gnome       -1   +2    0   +2   +1   -2       8         +25%
          Dwarf       +2   -3   +1   -2   +2   -3      11         +20%
          Half-Orc    +2   -1    0    0   +1   -4      10         +10%
          Half-Troll  +4   -4   -2   -4   +3   -6      12         +20%
          Dunadan     +1   +2   +1   +2   +3   +2      10         +80%
          High-Elf    +1   +3   -1   +3   +1   +5      10         +80%
 
          Racial abilities as compared to each other, with 1 the lowest, or
          worst,  and  10 the highest, or best, are listed in the following
          table.
 
                      Disarm Search Stealth Percep Fight Bows Save Infra
 
           Human         5      5      5       5     5     5    5  None
           Half-Elf      6      7      7       6     4     6    6  20 feet
           Elf           8      9      7       7     3     9    7  30 feet
           Hobbit       10     10     10      10     1    10   10  40 feet
           Gnome         9      7      9       9     2     8    9  40 feet
           Dwarf         6      8      3       5     9     5    8  50 feet
           Half-Orc      3      5      3       2     8     3    3  30 feet
           Half-Troll    1      1      1       1    10     1    1  30 feet
           Dunadan       9      8      7       8     7     8    7  None
           High-Elf      9      8      8       9     7    10   10  40 feet
 
 
 
          2.5.  Choosing A Class
 
          Once a race has been chosen, you will need to pick a class.  Some
          classes  will  not be available to certain races, for instance, a
          Half-Troll cannot become a Paladin.  For the first few adventures
          it  is  suggested that you run a warrior or rogue.  Spell casting
          generally requires a more experienced  player  that  is  familiar
          with survival techniques.
 
          Warrior
               A Warrior is a hack-and-slash character, who solves most  of
               his  problems  by cutting them to pieces, but will occasion-
               ally fall back on the help of a magical device.   His  prime
               stats  are  Strength  and Constitution, and a good Dexterity
               can really help at times.  A Warrior will be good at  Fight-
               ing and Throwing/Bows, but bad at most other skills.
 
          Mage
               A Mage must live by his wits.  He cannot hope to simply hack
               his  way  through the dungeon, and so must therefore use his
               magic to defeat, deceive, confuse, and escape.   A  mage  is
               not really complete without an assortment of magical devices
               to use in addition to his spells.  He can master the  higher
               level  magical  devices far easier than anyone else, and has
               the best saving throw to resist effects of  spells  cast  at
               him.   Intelligence  and  Dexterity  are  his primary stats.
               There is no rule that says  a  mage  cannot  become  a  good
               fighter, but spells are his true realm.
 
          Priest
               A Priest is a character of holy devotion.  They explore  the
               dungeon  only  to destroy the evil that lurks within, and if
               treasure just happens to fall into  their  packs,  well,  so
               much  more  to  the  glory of their church!  Priests receive
               their spells from a deity, and therefore do not choose which
               spells they will learn.  They are familiar with magical dev-
               ices, preferring to call them instruments of  god,  but  are
               not  as good as a mage in their use.  Priests have good sav-
               ing throws,  and  make  decent  fighters,  preferring  blunt
               weapons  over  edged  ones.   Wisdom  and  Charisma  are the
               priest's primary stats.
 
          Rogue
               A Rogue is a character that prefers to live by his  cunning,
               but  is capable of fighting his way out of a tight spot.  He
               is the master of traps and locks, no device being impossible
               for  him  to  overcome.  A rogue has a high stealth allowing
               him to sneak around many creatures without having to  fight,
               or sneak up and get the first blow.  A rogue's perception is
               higher than any other class, and many times he will notice a
               trap  or  secret  door  before having to search.  A rogue is
               better than warriors or paladins with magical  devices,  but
               still  can  not  rely on their performance.  Rogues can also
               learn a few spells, but not the  powerful  offensive  spells
               magi  can use.  A rogue's primary stats are Intelligence and
               Dexterity.
 
          Ranger
               A Ranger is a warrior/mage.  He is a good fighter,  and  the
               best  of  the  classes  with a missile weapon such as a bow.
               The ranger learns spells much more slowly than a  mage,  but
               is  capable  of  learning all  but the most powerful spells.
               Because a ranger is really  a  dual  class  character,  more
               experience  is  required for him to advance.  A ranger has a
               good stealth, good perception, good searching, a good saving
               throw,  and is good with magical devices.  His primary stats
               are Intelligence and Dexterity.
 
          Paladin
               A Paladin is a warrior/priest.  He is a very  good  fighter,
               second  only to the warrior class, but not very good at mis-
               sile weapons.  He receives prayers at a slower pace then the
               priest,  but  can even  receive the most  powerful  prayers.
               Because a paladin is  really  a  dual  class  character,  it
               requires  more  experience  to advance him.  A paladin lacks
               much in the way of abilities.  He is poor at  stealth,  per-
               ception,  searching,  and  magical devices.  He has a decent
               saving throw due to his divine alliance.  His primary  stats
               are Strength and Charisma.
 
 
          2.5.1.  Race Versus Class
 
                      Warrior   Mage    Priest    Rogue   Ranger   Paladin
 
          Human         Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes
          Half-Elf      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes
          Elf           Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      No
          Hobbit        Yes      Yes      No       Yes      No       No
          Gnome         Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      No       No
          Dwarf         Yes      No       Yes      No       No       No
          Half-Orc      Yes      No       Yes      Yes      No       No
          Half-Troll    Yes      No       Yes      No       No       No
          Dunadan       Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes
          High-Elf      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      No 
 
 
 
          2.5.2.  Class Versus Skills
 
          Class abilities as compared to each other, with 1 as the  lowest,
          or worst, and 10 as the highest, or best are shown in the follow-
          ing table.
 
                             Save  Stea-        Magic                 Extra
                  Fight Bows Throw  lth  Disarm Device Percep Search Exp/lev
 
          Warrior  10     6    3     2      4      3      2      2       +0%
          Mage      2     1   10     5      6     10      8      5      +30%
          Priest    4     3    6     5      3      8      4      4      +20%
          Rogue     8     9    7    10     10      6     10     10      +25%
          Ranger    6    10    8     7      6      7      6      6      +30%
          Paladin   9     5    4     2      2      4      2      2      +35%
 
          2.5.3.  Class Versus Stats
 
          Each class has bonuses and penalties to particular stats, shown in
          the following table:
 
                        STR     INT     WIS     DEX     CON     CHA
 
          Warrior       +5      -2      -2      +2      +2      -1
          Mage          -5      +3       0      +1      -2      +1
          Priest        -1      -3      +3      -1       0      +2
          Rogue         +2      +1      -2      +3      +1      -1
          Ranger        +2      +2       0      +1      +1      +1
          Paladin       +3      -3      +1       0      +2      +2
 
 
          3.  Adventuring
 
          After you have created your character, you will begin your  Angband
          adventure.   Symbols  appearing on your screen will represent the
          dungeon's walls, floor, objects, features, and creatures  lurking
          about.   In order to direct your character through his adventure,
          you will enter single character commands.
 
          Angband symbols and commands each have a help  section  devoted  to
          them.   You  should  review  these  sections before attempting an
          adventure.  Finally, a description of the  town  level  and  some
          general help on adventuring are included.
 
 
          4.  Symbols On Your Map
 
          Symbols on your map can be broken  down  into  three  categories:
          Features  of  the dungeon such as walls, floor, doors, and traps;
          Objects which can be picked up such as treasure, weapons, magical
          devices,  etc;  and creatures which may or may not move about the
          dungeon, but are mostly harmful to your character's well being.
          Some symbols can be in more than one category.   Also  note  that
          treasure  may be embedded in a wall, and the wall must be removed
          before the treasure can be picked up.
 
          It will not be necessary to remember all of the symbols and their
          meanings.  A simple command, the `/', will identify any character
          appearing on your map.  See the section on commands  for  further
          help.
 
 
                                      Features
 
          .   A floor space, or hidden trap   1   Entrance to General Store
          #   A wall                          2   Entrance to Armoury
          '   An open door                    3   Entrance to Weapon Smith
          +   A closed door                   4   Entrance to Temple
          ^   A trap                          5   Entrance to Alchemy Shop
          <   A staircase up                  6   Entrance to Magic Shop
          >   A staircase down                7   Entrance to the Black Market
 
          ;   A loose floor stone             8   Entrance to your Home
          %   A mineral vein                  :   Obstructing rubble
          @   The character                       An open pit (Blank)
 
 
                                       Objects
 
          !   A flask or potion         ?   A scroll
          "   An amulet                 [   Hard armour
          $   Money (Can be embedded)   \   A hafted weapon
          (   Soft armour               _   A staff
          )   A shield                  {   Missile (arrow, bolt, pebble)
          *   Gems (Can be embedded)    |   Sword or dagger
          -   A wand or rod             }   Missile weapon (Bow, X-bow, sling)
 
          /   A pole-arm                ~   Tools, chests and misc
          =   A ring                    ,   Food
          s   A skeleton                ]   Misc. armour
 
 
 
                                     Creatures
 
                    a   Giant Ant           A   Angelic being
                    b   Giant Bat           B   Birds (Roc etc.)
                    c   Giant Centipede     C   Canine (Wolf etc...)
                    d   Dragon              D   Ancient Dragon
                    e   Floating Eye        E   Elemental
                    f   Feline              F   Fly
                    g   Golem               G   Ghost
                    h   Demi-humans         H   Hybrid (Minotaur etc...)
                    i   Icky-Thing          I   Minor Demon (Manes etc...)
                    j   Jelly               J   Jabberwock
                    k   Kobold              K   Killer Beetle
                    l   Giant Louse         L   Lich
                    m   Mold                M   Mummy
                    n   Naga                N
                    o   Orc                 O   Ogre
                    p   Human               P   Giant Human(oid)
                    q   Quadroped           Q   Quylthulg
                    r   Rodent              R   Reptile/Amphibian
                    s   Skeleton            S   Scorpion/Spider
                    t   Giant Tick          T   Troll
                    u                       U   Umber Hulk
                    v   Vortex              V   Vampire
                    w   Worm or Worm Mass   W   Wight or Wraith.
                    x                       X   Xorn/Xaren
                    y   Yeek                Y   Yeti
                    z   Zombie              Z   Zephyr Hound
                    $   Creeping Coins      ,   Mushroom Patch
                    &   Major Demon (Balrog etc...)
 
 
 
          5.  Commands
 
          All commands are entered by pressing a single key.  Some commands
          are capital or control characters, which require you to hold down
          the shift or control key while pressing another key.  As  a  spe-
          cial  feature, control keys may be entered in a single stroke, or
          in two strokes, with a `^' character first.
 
          There are two command sets: the original command set which is the
          default,  and the rogue like command set.  The rogue like command
          is generally more convenient, especially  if  you  don't  have  a
          keypad.
 
          The following tables summarize the  two  command  sets.   Certain
          commands  may  be preceded by an optional count, and certain com-
          mands must be followed by  a  direction.   These  conditions  are
          indicated in the tables by `@' for an optional count, and `~' for
          a direction.  If a particular  command  requires  additional  key
          strokes, then they will be prompted for.
 
 
                              Original command summary.
            a   Aim and fire a wand         @ B ~    Bash (object/creature)
            b   Browse a book                 C      Change name
            c ~ Close a door                @ D ~    Disarm a trap/chest
            d   Drop an item                  E      Eat some food
            e   Equipment list                F      Fill lamp with oil
            f   Fire/Throw an item            G      Gain new magic spells
            i   Inventory list                L      Locate with map
          @ j ~ Jam a door with spike         M      Map shown reduced size
            l ~ Look given direction        @ R      Rest for a period
            m   Magic spell casting           S      Search Mode
          @ o ~ Open a door/chest           @ T ~    Tunnel in a direction
            p   Pray                          A      Activate an artifact
            q   Quaff a potion                =      Set options
            r   Read a scroll                 ?      Command quick reference
          @ s   Search for trap or door       {      Inscribe an object
            t   Take off an item            @ - ~    Move without pickup
            u   Use a staff                   . ~    Run in direction
            v   display your score            V      Version, credits, & manual
            w   Wear/Wield an item            CTRL-K Quit the game
            x   Exchange weapon             @ CTRL-P Repeat the last message
            z   Zap a rod                   @ ~      for movement
            <   Go up an up staircase         CTRL-X Save character and quit
            >   Go down a down staircase      CTRL-F Repeat level feeling
            /   Identify a character          *      Targetting Mode

 
                            Rogue like command summary.
            a      Activate a rod          @ ~      for movement
            c ~    Close a door              C      Character description
            d      Drop an item            @ D ~    Disarm a trap/chest
            e      Equipment list            E      Eat some food
          @ f ~    Force/bash item/monster   F      Fill lamp with oil
            i      Inventory list            G      Gain new magic spells
            m      magic spell casting       M      Map shown reduced size
          @ o ~    Open a door/chest         P      Peruse a book
            p      Pray                      Q      Quit the game
            q      Quaff a potion          @ R      Rest for a period
            r      Read a scroll           @ S ~    Spike a door
          @ s      Search for trap or door   T      Take off an item
            t      Throw an item             A      Activate Artifact
            v      display your score        V      Version, credits and manual
            w      Wear/Wield an item        W      Where: locate self
            x ~    Examine surroundings      X      Exchange weapon
            z      Zap a wand                Z      Zap a staff
            =      Set options               <      Go up an up staircase
            /      Identify a character      >      Go down a down stair
          @ CTRL-P Previous message review   {      Inscribe an object
          @ - ~    Move without pickup       ?      Type this page
          @ CTRL ~ Tunnel in a direction     CTRL-X Save game and exit
          @ SHFT ~ Run in direction          CTRL-F Repeat level feeling
            #      Search Mode               *      Targetting Mode
 
          5.1.  Special keys.
 
          Certain commands may be entered at any time  input  is  accepted.
          The  special character control-R, entered as a single key stroke,
          will always refresh the screen.  This may be used at  any  prompt
          for input, and is otherwise ignored.
 
          If you are playing on a UNIX or similar system,  then  there  are
          some  additional  special  characters used by Angband.  The special
          character control-C will interrupt Angband, and ask if  you  really
          want  to  die and quit the game.  If you choose not to die, Angband
          merely  continues  as  before,  except  that  resting,   running,
          repeated  commands,  etc will be terminated.  You can suspend the
          game with control-Z, and return to the  original  command  shell.
          In  this  case,  Angband is not terminated, and may be restarted at
          any time from the shell. 
 
          For many input requests or queries, the special character  ESCAPE
          will abort the command.  For the "-more-" message prompts, any of
          SPACE, ESCAPE, RETURN (control-m), or LINEFEED (control-j) can be
          used to continue after pausing to read the displayed message.
 
          It is possible to give control  character  commands  in  two  key
          stroke, by typing a `^' followed by the appropriate letter of the
          alphabet.  This is useful when  running  Angband  in  circumstances
          where  control  characters  are intercepted by some external pro-
          cess, or by the operating system.
 
          5.2.  Direction.
 
          For the original style command set, a direction  is  given  by  a
          digit  which  is  in  the appropriate orientation on your keypad.
          For the rogue like command set, a direction is given  by  one  of
          the letters `hykulnjb'.  Again, the relative position of the keys
          on the keyboard gives a clue as to the direction.  The digit  `5'
          for the original commands, and the period `.' for rogue like com-
          mands, is a null direction indicator.  This is only allowed in  a
          movement  command (to stay in one place) or in a look command (to
          look in all directions).
 
               Original Directions
 
                      |      /
                  7    8     9
 
               -  4          6  -
 
                  1    2     3
                 /     |
 
 
 
               Rogue-like Directions
 
                       |       /
                  y     k      u
 
               -  h            l  -
 
                  b     j      n
                 /      |
 
 
          Movement is accomplished by specifying a  direction  immediately.
          Simply  press the appropriate key and you character will move one
          step in that direction.  You can only move onto and through floor
          spots,  and  only  if  they  contain  no creatures or obstructing
          objects such as a closed door.
 
          Other commands that require a direction will prompt for it.
 
          Moving your character one step at a time can  be  time  consuming
          and boring, so a faster method has been supplied.  For the origi-
          nal style command set, by using the Run command `.', you may move
          in   a   direction  until  something  interesting  happens.   For
          instance, by pressing the period key `.' followed by  the  direc-
          tion 8, your character would continue to move up the screen, only
          coming to a stop after at least one condition is satisfied.   For
          the  rogue  like command set, typing a shifted directional letter
          will move you in that direction until something interesting  hap-
          pens.   The  stopping conditions are described more completely in
          the run command description below.
 
 
          5.3.  Command counts.
 
          Some commands can be executed a fixed number of times by  preced-
          ing  them  with a count.  Counted commands will execute until the
          count expires, or until you type any character,  or  until  some-
          thing  significant  happens,  such  as  being  attacked.  Thus, a
          counted command doesn't work to attack another  creature.   While
          the  command  is  being  repeated, the number of times left to be
          repeated will flash by on the command line at the bottom  of  the
          screen.
 
          To give a count to a command in the rogue  like  mode,  type  the
          number  in digits, then the command.  A count of zero defaults to
          a count of 99.
 
          To give a count to a command in the original mode,  type  a  `#',
          followed  by  the  digits.  To count a movement command (which is
          itself a digit), type a space after the number, and you will then
          be prompted for the command.
 
          Counted commands are very useful for searching or  tunneling,  as
          they  automatically terminate on success, or if you are attacked.
          You may also terminate a counted command, or a  Run  command,  by
          typing  any  character.   This  character  is  ignored, but it is
          safest to use a SPACE or ESCAPE which are always ignored as  com-
          mands.
 
 
          5.4.  Selection of objects.
 
          Many commands will also prompt for  a  particular  object  to  be
          used.   For  example,  the  command to read a scroll will ask you
          which of the scrolls that you are carrying that you wish to read.
          In  such  cases,  the selection is made by typing a letter of the
          alphabet.  The prompt will indicate  the  possible  letters,  and
          will  also allow you to type the key `*', which causes all of the
          available options to be described.
 
          The particular object may be selected by an upper case or a lower
          case  letter.   If  lower case is used, the selection takes place
          immediately.  If upper case is used, then the  particular  option
          is  described,  and  you  are  given  the option of confirming or
          retracting that choice.  Upper case selection is thus safer,  but
          requires an extra key stroke.
 
 
          5.5.  Command descriptions
 
          In the following command descriptions, the original style key  is
          given.  If the rogue like key for that command is different, then
          it will be shown inside the braces following the command name.
 
          B <Dir> - Bash. {f - force}
               The bash command includes breaking open doors and chests, or
               bashing  an  opponent.   Your bashing ability increases with
               weight and strength.  In addition, when bashing an opponent,
               you  will  either  perform  a  body  bash, or, if wielding a
               shield, perform a shield bash which is more effective.
 
               Bashing a door can throw you off balance, but this will  not
               generally  be a problem.  Doors that have been jammed closed
               with spikes can only be opened by bashing.  Locked doors may
               also  be  bashed open.  Bashing a door open will permanently
               break it.
 
               Bashing a  creature  affects  both  you  and  the  opponent.
               Depending  on  your  dexterity, you may or may not be thrown
               off balance allowing free moves to your  opponent.   If  the
               bash is successful, your opponent may be thrown off balance,
               thus giving you some free hits or a  chance  to  run.   Huge
               creatures  such  as  ancient  dragons  will  be difficult or
               impossible to bash successfully.
 
               A player automatically performs a shield bash instead  of  a
               body  bash,  if  he is currently wearing a shield.  A shield
               bash adds the damage of a shield to that of the bash, so  it
               is more effective.  Size and material both affect the damage
               that a shield will do.
 
               You can apply a count to this command, but if you are thrown
               off balance, the count will be reset straight away.
 
          C  - Print character (to screen or file).
               This command allows the player to either display his charac-
               ter  on the terminal screen, or to print an entire character
               info listing to a file.  The character's history, equipment,
               and  inventory  list are also included if you chose to print
               it to a file.
 
          D <Dir> - Disarm a trap.
               You can attempt to disarm floor traps,  or  trapped  chests.
               If  you  fail  to  disarm a trap, there is a chance that you
               blunder and set it off.  You can only disarm  a  trap  on  a
               chest  after  finding it with the search command.  This com-
               mand can have a count.
 
          E  - Eat some food.
               A character must eat occasionally to remain effective.  As a
               character  grows hungry, a message will appear at the bottom
               of the screen  saying  "Hungry".   If  a  character  remains
               hungry long enough, he will become weak and eventually start
               fainting.  Eventually, you will die of starvation if you  do
               not eat.
 
          F  - Fill a lamp or lantern with oil.
               If your character is currently using a lamp for  light,  and
               if  he  has  a  flask of oil in inventory, he may refill the
               lamp by using this command.  A lamp is capable of a  maximum
               of  15000  turns  of light, and each flask has 7500 turns of
               oil contained in it.
 
          G  - Gain new spells.
               To actually learn new spells, you  must  use  this  command.
               When  you  are  able  to learn some spells, the word "Study"
               will appear on the status line at the bottom of the  screen.
               Magi,   rogues,  and  rangers must have the magic books con-
               taining new spells to be able to learn  them.   Priests  and
               Paladins are given their prayers by their gods, and hence do
               not need a holy book before learning the spells in it.
 
          L  - Location on map. {W - where}
               The location command allows you to look at all parts of  the
               current dungeon level.  The displayed view of the dungeon is
               shifted to bring your  current  position  as  close  to  the
               center as possible.  You may then shift the displayed map in
               any of the eight possible directions.  Each shift moves your
               view  point by one half screen.  The top line displays a map
               section number, each map section having a height  and  width
               one half that of the display, and indicates the direction of
               the display from your current position.  If  you  exit  this
               command  while  you are not on the display, then the display
               is centered again.
 
          M  - Map shown reduced size.
               This command will show the entire map, reduced by  a  factor
               of  nine,  on  the screen.  Since nine places map into every
               character on the screen, only  the  major  dungeon  features
               will  be  visible.   This  is  especially useful for finding
               where the stairs are in relation to your  current  position.
               It is also useful for identifying unexplored areas.
 
          R  - Rest for a number of turns.
               You may rest one turn with the null movement command.  Rest-
               ing  for longer periods of time is accomplished by using the
               Rest command, followed by the number of turns  you  want  to
               rest your character.  Resting will continue until the speci-
               fied duration has expired, or something to wake the  charac-
               ter  happens,  such  as  a creature wandering by, or getting
               hungry, or some disability like blindness expiring.   It  is
               sometimes  a  good idea to rest a beat up character until he
               regains some of his hit points, but be sure to  have  plenty
               of food if you rest often.
 
               If you have accidentally entered in a rest period too large,
               or  change  your mind about the resting period, you may wake
               your character up by typing any character.  Space  is  best,
               since  if  the rest ends just before the character is typed,
               the space is ignored as a command.
 
               It is also possible to rest by typing the count  first,  and
               using either the Rest or the null movement command.
 
          S  - Search mode toggle. {#}
               The Searching toggle will take you into and  out  of  search
               mode.   When  first  pressed,  the  message "Searching" will
               appear at the bottom of the screen.  You are now taking  two
               turns  for each command, one for the command and one turn to
               search.  This means that you are taking twice  the  time  to
               move  about the dungeon, and therefore twice the food.  If a
               creature should happen by or attack you,  search  mode  will
               automatically  shut  off.  You may also turn off search mode
               by again pressing the `S' {or #} key.
 
          T <Dir> - Tunnel through rock. {control-<Dir>}
               Tunneling (Mining) is a very useful  art.   There  are  four
               kinds  of  rock  present in the Pits of Angband: Permanent
               Rock, Granite Rock, Magma Intrusion, and Quartz Veins.  Per-
               manent  Rock  is  exactly  that, permanent.  Granite is very
               hard, therefore hard to dig through, and contains  no  valu-
               able  metals.   Magma  and Quartz veins are softer and some-
               times bear valuable metals and gems, shown as a `$' or a `*'
               character.   You  can tell if the metal or gems are embedded
               into the wall by trying to move onto  them.   If  you  can't
               move  over  them,  you'll have to dig them out.  There is an
               option which causes magma and quartz to  be  displayed  dif-
               ferently than other rock types.
 
               Tunneling can be VERY difficult by hand, so when you dig  be
               sure  to  wield  either a shovel or a pick.  Magical shovels
               and picks can be found which allow the wielder to  dig  much
               faster than normal, and a good strength also helps.
 
               Tunneling can have a count.
 
          A    - Activate an Artifact.
               If you are wearing/wielding a suitable  artifact  with  some
               special inbuilt spell (Such as Dragon Scale Mail, or  Ring's
               of Power), this will allow you to access this ability.
 
          a <Dir> - Aim a wand. {z - zap}
               Wands must be aimed in a direction to be  used.   Wands  are
               magical  devices and therefore use the Magical Devices abil-
               ity of the  player.   They  will  either  affect  the  first
               object/creature  encountered,  or affect anything in a given
               direction, depending upon the wand.  An obstruction such  as
               door  or wall will generally stop the effects of a wand from
               traveling further.
 
          z <Dir> - Zap a rod. {a - activate}
               Rods can have staff-like effects or  wand-like  effects  and 
               are often extremely rare. Unlike wands and staffs they don't
               have charges. Instead they draw from the powers around  them
               and can be activated only once in a while. The  timeout  can
               depend on the type of rod.
 
          b  - Browse a book. {P - peruse}
               You can only read a book if you are of its realm.  Therefore
               a  magic  user could read a magic book, but not a holy book.
               Warriors will not be able to read either kind of book.  When
               the  browse  command  is  used, all of the spells or prayers
               contained therein are displayed, along with information such
               as  their level, the amount of mana used up in casting them,
               and whether or not you know the spell or prayer.  There  are
               4 books  available in  the  stores for  each  class of spell
               caster,  and there are rumors  of more powerful  tomes which
               lie deep within the dungeon.
 
          c <Dir> - Close a door.
               Non-intelligent and certain other creatures will not be  able
               to  open  a  door.   Therefore  shutting doors can be a life
               saver.  You must be adjacent to an open door, and you cannot
               close broken doors.  Bashing a door open will break it.
 
          d  - Drop an object from your inventory.
               You can drop an object onto the floor beneath  you  if  that
               floor  spot  does  not already contain an object.  Doors and
               traps are considered objects in this  sense.   If  you  have
               several  objects  of the same kind, you will be prompted for
               dropping one or all of them.  It  is  possible  to  directly
               drop things which you are wielding or wearing.
 
          e  - Display a list of equipment being used.
               Use the Equipment command  to  display  a  list  of  objects
               currently  being  used by your character.  Each object has a
               specific place where it is placed, and that only one  object
               of each type may be used at any one time, excepting rings of
               which two can be worn, one on each hand.
 
          f <Dir> - Fire/Throw an object/use a missile weapon. {t - throw}
               You may throw any object carried by your character.  Depend-
               ing  upon  the  weight  of an object, it may travel across a
               room or drop down beside you.  If you throw an  object  such
               as an arrow, only one will be used at a time.
 
               If you throw at a  creature,  your  chance  of  hitting  the
               creature  is  determined by your pluses to hit, your ability
               at throwing, and the  object's  pluses  to  hit.   Once  the
               creature  is  hit,  the  object may or may not do any actual
               damage to it.  Certain objects in the dungeon can  do  great
               amounts  of  damage  when thrown, but it's for you to figure
               out the obscure ones.  Oil flasks are considered to  be  lit
               before  thrown,  therefore  they  will  do  fire damage to a
               creature if they hit it.
 
               To use a bow with arrows, simply wield the bow and throw the
               arrows.   Extra  pluses  to damage and hitting are gained by
               wielding the proper weapon and  throwing  the  corresponding
               ammo.   A  heavy  crossbow  with  bolts  for  example,  is a
               killer...
 
          i  - Display a list of objects being carried.
               This command displays a list of all objects  being  carried,
               but  not currently in use.  You may carry up to 22 different
               kinds of objects, not  including  those  in  your  equipment
               list.   Depending upon your strength, you will be able carry
               many identical objects before hitting your weight limit.
 
          j <Dir> - Jam a door with an iron spike. {S - spike}
               Most humanoid and many intelligent creatures can simply open
               a closed door, and can eventually get through a locked door.
               Therefore you may spike a door in order  to  jam  it.   Each
               spike  used  on  a door will increase its strength, although
               the more spikes you add, the  less  effect  each  additional
               spike has.  It is very easy to jam a door so much as to make
               it impossible for your character to bash it down,  so  spike
               doors  wisely.   The bigger a creature is, the easier it can
               bash a door down.  Therefore twenty or more spikes might  be
               necessary  to slow down a dragon, where one spike would slow
               down a kobold.  This command can be counted.
 
          l <Dir> - Look in a direction. {x - examine}
               The Look command is useful in identifying the exact type  of
               object or creature shown on the screen.  Also, if a creature
               is on top of an object, the look command will describe both.
               You  can  see  creatures and objects up to 200 feet away (20
               spaces).  You may freely use the Look  command  without  the
               creatures getting a move on you.
 
               Looking in a particular direction sees everything  within  a
               cone  of  vision  which  just  overlaps the cones of the two
               adjacent directions.  Looking with the  null  direction  `5'
               (or `.') sees everything which there is to be seen.
 
               You are also able to access your monster  memory  with  this
               command.   If you see a creature, you are prompted to ask if
               you wish to see a short paragraph of information about  your
               experiences  with  that  creature.   See also the section on
               being attacked.
 
          m  - Cast a magic spell.
               To cast a spell, a character must  have  previously  learned
               it,  and must also have in the inventory a magical book from
               which the spell may be read.  Each spell  has  a  chance  of
               failure  which  starts  out  fairly large but decreases as a
               character gains levels.  If a character does not have enough
               mana, the chance of failed is greatly increased, and he gam-
               bles on  losing  a  point  of  constitution.   You  will  be
               prompted for confirmation before trying to cast a spell when
               you don't have enough mana.  Since a character must read the
               spell from a book, he cannot be blind or confused when cast-
               ing a spell, and there must be some light present.
 
          o <Dir> - Open a door, chest, or lock.
               To open an object such as a door or chest you must  use  the
               Open  command.   If  the  object is locked, the Open command
               will attempt to pick the lock,  based  on  your  ability  at
               disarming.   If  an  object  is trapped and you open it, the
               trap will be set off.  This command can be counted, you  may
               need several tries to get it open.
 
          p  - Read a prayer.
               To pay  effectively,  a  character  must  have  learned  the
               prayer, and must also have in the inventory a holy book from
               which the prayer may be read.  Each prayer has a  chance  of
               being ignored which starts out fairly large but decreases as
               a character gains levels.  If  a  character  does  not  have
               enough mana, the chance of failure is greatly increased, and
               he gambles on losing a point of constitution.  You  will  be
               prompted  for  confirmation  before  trying to pray when you
               don't have enough mana.  Since a  character  must  read  the
               prayer  from  a  book,  he  cannot be blind or confused when
               praying, and there must be some light present.
 
          q  - Quaff a potion.
               To drink a potion use the Quaff command.  A  potion  affects
               the player in some manner.  The effects of the potion may be
               immediately noticed, or they may be subtle and unnoticed.
 
          r  - Read a scroll.
               To read a scroll use the Read command.  A scroll  spell  has
               an  area  affect,  except  in  a  few cases such as identify
               scrolls which act on other objects.  Two scrolls, the  iden-
               tify  scroll  and the recharge scroll, have titles which can
               be read without setting them off, and by pressing ESCAPE can
               be saved for future use.
 
          s  - Search general area one turn.
               The Search command can be used to locate  hidden  traps  and
               secret  doors  about the player.  More than a single turn of
               searching will be required in most cases.  You should always
               search  a  chest  before  trying to open it because they are
               generally trapped.  This command can be  counted,  which  is
               useful  if  you are really sure of finding something eventu-
               ally.  A counted search ends as soon as anything is found.
 
          t  - Take off a piece of equipment. {T}
               Use the Take Off command to remove an object from  use,  and
               return it to your inventory.  Occasionally you will run into
               a cursed item which cannot be  removed.   Cursed  items  are
               always  bad,  and  can  only be taken off after removing the
               curse.
 
          u  - Use a staff. {Z - Zap}
               The Use command will activate a staff.  Like  scrolls,  most
               staffs  have  an  area affect.  Because staffs are generally
               more powerful than most other items, they are also harder to
               use correctly.
 
          v  - Display current version of game.
               The Version command displays the  credits  for  the  current
               version of Angband.
 
          w  - Wear or wield an item being carried.
               To wear or wield  an  object  in  your  inventory,  use  the
               Wear/Wield  command.  If an object is already in use for the
               same  function,  it  is  automatically  removed  first.   An
               object's  bonuses  cannot  be  gained  until  it  is worn or
               wielded.
 
          x  - Exchange primary and secondary weapons. {X}
               A secondary weapon is any weapon which may be needed  often.
               Instead of searching through your inventory, you may use the
               exchange command to keep the weapon ready.  For instance, if
               you  wanted  to  use your bow most of the time, but needed a
               sword for close combat, you could wield your sword, use  the
               exchange command to make it the secondary weapon, then wield
               your bow.  If the sword was suddenly needed, simply use  the
               exchange command to switch between the bow and the sword.
 
          /  - Identify a character shown on screen.
               Use the identify  command  to  find  out  what  a  character
               displayed on the screen stands for.  For instance, by press-
               ing `/.', you can find out that the `.' stands for  a  floor
               spot.   When used with a creature, the identify command will
               tell you only what class of creature the symbol stands  for,
               not  the  specific  creature, therefore use the look command
               for this information.
 
               If you identify the character for a creature in your monster
               memory,  you  are  also prompted to ask if you wish to see a
               paragraph of information on those  creatures  identified  by
               the given character.  Several creatures may be identified in
               this  way.   Typing  ESCAPE  after  the  paragraph  for  any
               creature  will  abort  back  to command level.  See also the
               section on being attacked.
 
          ?  - Display a list of commands.
               The ? command displays a quick reference help  page  on  the
               screen.
 
          -  - Move without pickup.
               This is followed by a move command, and causes you  to  move
               over  any object without picking it up.  You can associate a
               count with this command.

          *  - Targetting Mode (if available)
               This  will  allow you to aim your  spells and  throwing to a
               specific square or at a monster.  This allows your character
               to shoot at monsters not directly in line, as well.

          =  - Set options.
               This is a free move, to set various  Angband  options.  Most
               Enter  'y' or  'n' for all options except the last 2,  which
               accept a number in the range from 0 to 9.
 
               The available options are:
 
           (1) Cut known corners when running.  This is on by default,  and
               the only reason for switching it off would be if you had the
               search flag on and wished to look for doors in the extremity
               of every corner.
 
           (2) Examine potential corners  when  running.   This  is  on  by
               default, and allows you to run along an unknown curving cor-
               ridor.  If, however, you are running from  a  creature,  and
               wish to stop at an unknown corner to make a considered deci-
               sion, then you may wish to switch this option off.
 
           (3) Print self during a run.  This  is  off  by  default,  which
               gives faster screen updating.
 
           (4) Stop when map sector changes.  This is off by  default,  but
               can  be  switched  on if you wish to stop running whenever a
               new part of the dungeon appears in view.
 
           (5) Treat open doors as empty space while running.  This is  off
               by  default,  in which case you stop when ever you run up to
               an open door.
 
           (6) Do not always pick up objects.   This is off by default,  in
               which case stepping over an object automatically  causes you
               to pick it up.   With the option on,  you must use the (g)et
               command in order to pick up an object.
 
           (7) Prompt when picking up objects.   This is on by default,  in
               which case,  when you step over an object,  you are prompted 
               with  a  description of the object to see if you really want
               to get it.
 
           (8) Rogue like command set.  This option  controls  the  command
               set in use.  It is off by default.
 
           (9) Show weights in inventory.  This is off by default:  switch-
               ing it on causes the inventory listing to include the weight
               of the objects.   This may be useful to know if your pack is
               getting too heavy.
 
          (10) Show weights in equipment list.   This is off by default:
               switching it on causes the equipment listings to include the
               weight of the objects which you have equipped.  This may  be
               useful to know if you are wearing too many heavy objects.
 
          (11) Highlight mineral seams.  This is off by default.  Switching
               it on causes quartz and magma to be displayed as `%' instead
               of `#'.  This is handy when  mining.   Setting  this  option
               does  not immediately highlight all minerals, but only those
               which are subsequently displayed.  To display all  minerals,
               just  move  the  map  around  a  bit  with  the  `Where' (or
               `Locate') command.
 
          (12) Disable haggling in stores.  This is off by default; switch-
               ing  this on means  that you will not have to haggle  before 
               getting the final price.   Note that a good haggler will get
               a better price than one who does not haggle at all!
 
          (13) Plain descriptions.  This is off by default.  Switching this
               on will cause all objects to be described without additional
               details  (such as the  color of  potions).   Note that items
               which  are  bought from the stores  will never have  special
               descriptions.

          (14) Quick messages.  This is off by default.   Switching this on
               means  that you can hit  any key to  continue at a  '-more-'
               prompt.  This may be convenient when attacking monsters that
               breed quickly.

          (15) Equippy characters.  This option is off by default.  Turning
               this on will print out a display of the items which you have
               equipped (and are currently wielding) on the line above your
               statistics.

          (16) Low hit point warning.  This  is a number in 10%  increments
               which  will give you a special  warning when your hit points  
               fall below that  percentage.   You might use this to  decide 
               when discretion should indeed be the better part of valor. 
 
          (17) Delay speed.  This is a number that adjusts how fast various
               graphical  effects occur.   Higher  values  result in longer
               delays.  Set this according to your personal preferences.
 
               The  setting of all of these  options will  persist in  your
               savefile, even after you die.
 
 
          ^P  - Previous message.
               The  Control-P  command  will  redisplay  the  last  message
               printed  on  the  message line at the top of your screen.  A
               second such command will display all of the saved  messages.
               You may also give this command a count to specify the number
               of previous messages to display.  At present, only  22  mes-
               sages are saved.
 
          ^F  - Repeat level feeling.
               The  Control-F  command will  redisplay the  general feeling
               that you have concerning this level.
 
          ^K  - Quit the game without saving. {Q}
               To exit the game without saving your  character  (i.e.  kill
               him/her)  use  the  Control-K  command.  Once exited in this
               manner, your character is non-recoverable.
 
          ^X  - Save your character and exit the game.
               To save your game so that it can be restarted later, use the
               Control-X command.  Save files will also be generated if the
               game crashes due to a system error.  When you die, a reduced
               save  file  is produced containing only your monster memory,
               and your option settings.
 
          {  - Inscribe an object.
               This command can be used to inscribe any short string on  an
               object.  Inscriptions are limited to twelve characters.  The
               inscription applies only to the particular object, it is not
               automatically  transferred  to  all  similar objects.  Under
               certain circumstances, Angband will itself  inscribe  objects:
               if  they  have been discovered to be cursed or enchanted, or
               if they have been sampled without being identified.  In this
               last  case, Angband does in fact carefully inscribe every such
               item.
 
          <  - Go up an up staircase.
               If you move onto an up staircase you may use the `<' command
               to  go up one level.  There is always one staircase going up
               on every level except for the town level (this does not mean
               it's  easy  to find).  Going up a staircase will always take
               you to a new dungeon area except for the town  level,  which
               remains the same for the duration of your character.
 
          >  - Go down a down staircase.
               If you are on top of a down staircase you may  use  the  `>'
               command to go down one level.  There are always two or three
               staircases going down on each level, except the  town  level
               which  has  only  one.  Going down will always take you to a
               new dungeon area.
 
          . <Dir> - Move in direction. {shift<Dir>}
               The Run command will move you  in  the  indicated  direction
               until either you have to make a choice as between two direc-
               tions, or something interesting happens.  There are  options
               which  determine  behavior  at corners, and at screen boun-
               daries.  More precisely, the conditions which stop a run are
               as follows:
 
          (1)  A creature appears on the screen, one already on the  screen
               moves, or a creature attacks you or casts a spell at you.
 
          (2)  You move next to an object, or a feature such as a  door  or
               trap.
 
          (3)  You come to the end of open space, or the end of a  passage,
               or a junction of passages, or a hole in a wall.
 
          (4)  Corners are more complex.  A corner allows a choice  between
               adjacent  rectangular  and  diagonal directions.  If you can
               see walls which ensure that  the  diagonal  gives  a  faster
               traversal,  then  action  is determined by the "cut corners"
               options.  If it is set, then you move diagonally through the
               corner.  This gives you maximum speed (as is nice if you are
               fleeing a hidden creature).  On the other hand, this  option
               should not be set if you want more careful coverage (as when
               you are searching) so that you take two  moves  through  the
               corner.
 
          (5)  At a potential corner, where walls are not yet visible ahead
               of  the  rectangular direction, the "examine corners" option
               is considered.  If set, you  will  move  straight  into  the
               corner,  which will light up all the corner and so determine
               where you can go from there.   This  allows  you  to  follow
               corners  in  new  passages.   If  the option is not set, you
               stop.  This allows highly cautious running where you want to
               stop at all potential choice points.
 
          (6)  If you move off the screen while running, then a new section
               of  the  dungeon is display and the run continues.  However,
               if the "stop when map changes" option is set, you will stop.
               Again,  this  is  an  option for nervous players, after all,
               there may be a dragon on the new screen.
 
          (7)  Anything typed during a run causes the  run  to  stop.   The
               character  causing  this to occur is ignored.  It is best to
               use a space, which is ignored as a command, just in case the
               run stops just before you type the character.
 
          (8)  Various changes of state, such as recovery from fear or loss
               of heroism, will stop a run.
 
          6.  The Town Level
 
          The town level is where you will begin your adventure.  The  town
          consists of eight buildings each with an entrance, some towns peo-
          ple, and a wall which surrounds the town.  The first time you are
          in town it will be daytime, but you may return to find that dark-
          ness has fallen.  (Note that some spells may act  differently  in
          the town level.)
 
 
          6.1.  Townspeople
 
          The town contains many different kinds of people.  There are  the
          street  urchins,  young  children  who will mob an adventurer for
          money, and seem  to  come  out  of  the  woodwork  when  excited.
          Blubbering  Idiots  are  a  constant  annoyance, but not harmful.
          Public drunks wander about the town singing, and are of no threat
          to anyone.  Sneaky rogues hang about watching for a likely victim
          to mug.  And finally, what town would be complete without a swarm
          of  half  drunk warriors, who take offense or become annoyed just
          for the fun of it.
 
          Most of the towns people should be avoided by the largest  possi-
          ble  distance  when  you wander from store to store.  Fights will
          break out though, so be prepared.  Since your character  grew  up
          in  this  world of intrigue, no experience is awarded for killing
          on the town level.
 
 
          6.2.  Supplies
 
          Your character  will  begin  his  adventure  with  some  supplies
          already  on  him.   Use  the  Inventory `i' command to check what
          these supplies are.  It will be necessary to buy  other  supplies
          before  continuing into the dungeon, however, so be sure to enter
          each of the stores.
 
 
          6.3.  Town Buildings
 
          You may enter any of the stores, if they  are  open,  and  barter
          with  the  owner  for  items you can afford.  When bartering, you
          enter prices you will pay (or accept) for some object.   You  can
          either enter the absolute amount, or precede a number with a plus
          or minus sign to give a positive or negative  increment  on  your
          previous  offer.   But  be  warned  that the owners can easily be
          insulted, and may even throw you out for a while  if  you  insult
          them  too often.  To enter a store, simply move onto the entrance
          represented by the numbers 1 through 8.
 
          If you consistently bargain well in a store, that is,  you  reach
          the  final  offer  much more often than not, then the store owner
          will eventually recognize that you are a superb haggler, and will
          go  directly  to  the  final  offer instead of haggling with you.
          Items which cost less than 10 gold pieces do not count,  as  hag-
          gling well with these items is usually either very easy or almost
          impossible.  Also, the store owner will always haggle  for  items
          costing  more  than  5000  gold  pieces, because of the amount of
          money involved.
 
          Once inside a store, the  store  inventory  will  appear  on  the
          screen  along  with a set of options for your character.  You may
          browse the store's inventory if it takes more than  one  page  to
          display,  and you may sell to, or purchase items from, his inven-
          tory.  You can execute your inventory and equipment  commands  to
          see  what  you  are carrying.  Not shown with the options are the
          wear, take off, and exchange commands which will also  work,  but
          were excluded to keep the options simple.
 
          Stores do not always have  everything  in  stock.   As  the  game
          progresses,  they  may  get new items so check from time to time.
          Also, if you sell them an item, it may get  sold  to  a  customer
          while  you  are adventuring, so don't always expect to be able to
          get back everything you have sold.
 
          Store owners will not buy harmful or useless items.  If an object
          is  unidentified, they will pay you some base price for it.  Once
          they have bought it they will immediately  identify  the  object.
          If  it is a good object, they will add it to their inventory.  If
          it was a bad bargain, they simply throw the item  away.   In  any
          case,  you  may  receive some knowledge of the item if another is
          encountered.
 
          The General Store
               The  General  Store  sells  foods,  drinks,  some  clothing,
               torches,  lamps,  oil,  shovels,  picks, and spikes.  All of
               these items, and some others, can be sold back to  the  Gen-
               eral  store for money.  The entrance to the General Store is
               a `1'.
 
          The Armoury
               The Armoury is where the  town's armour  is  fashioned.  All
               sorts  of  protective gear may be bought and sold here.  The
               entrance to the Armoury is a `2'.
 
          The Weaponsmith's Shop
               The Weaponsmith's Shop  is  where  the  town's  weapons  are
               fashioned.   Hand  and  missile weapons may be purchased and
               sold  here,  along  with  arrows,  bolts,  and  shots.   The
               entrance to the Weaponsmith's is a `3'.
 
          The Temple
               The Temple deals in healing and restoration potions, as well
               as bless scrolls, word of recall scrolls, some approved pri-
               estly weapons, etc.  The entrance to the Temple is a `4'.
 
          The Alchemy shop
               The Alchemy Shop deals in all manner of potions and scrolls.
               The entrance to the Alchemy Shop is a `5'.
 
          The Magic User's Shop
               The Magic User's Shop  deals in all  sorts of rings,  wands,
               amulets, and staves.   The entrance  to the Magic Shop  is a
               `6'.
 
          The Black Market
               The Black Market will sell and buy anything  at extortionate
               prices. However it often has VERY good items in it. The shop
               keepers are not known for their tolerance... The entrance to
               the Black Market is a '7'.
 
          Your Home
               This is your house where  you  can  store  objects  that you 
               cannot carry on your travels, or will need at a  later date.
               Your home is an '8'.
 
 
          7.  Within The Dungeon
 
          Once your character is  adequately  supplied  with  food,  light,
          armor,  and  weapons,  he is ready to enter the dungeon.  Move on
          top of the `>' symbol and use the down `>' command.  Your charac-
          ter  enters  a  maze  of  interconnecting  staircases and finally
          passes through a one-way door.  He is now on the first  level  of
          the  dungeon  (50 feet), and must survive many horrible and chal-
          lenging encounters to find the treasure lying about.
 
          There are two sources for light once inside  the  dungeon.   Per-
          manent  light which has been magically placed within rooms, and a
          light source carried by the player.  If neither is  present,  the
          character  will  be  unable to map or see any attackers.  Lack of
          light will also affect searching, picking locks, and disarming.
 
          A character must wield a torch or lamp in order to supply his own
          light.   Once  a  torch  or  lamp  has only 50 or less turns left
          before burning out, the message "Your  light  is  growing  faint"
          will  be  displayed  at  random intervals.  Once a torch is burnt
          out, it is useless and can be dropped.  A lamp or lantern can  be
          refilled  with  oil  by  using the Fill `F' command.  You must of
          course be carrying extra oil to refill a lantern.
 
 
          8.  Attacking and Being Attacked
 
          Attacking is simple in Angband. If you move into a  creature, you
          attack  him.  You can attack from a distance by firing a missile,
          or by magical means such as aiming a wand.  Creatures  attack  in
          the  same  way,  if  they  move  into you, they attack you.  Some
          creatures can also cast spells from a distance,  and  others  can
          breathe fire or worse on you from a distance.
 
          Creatures moving in walls can not be attacked by wands and  other
          magic  attacks  normally  stopped  by  walls.   You  can attack a
          creature in a wall normally though by trying  to  move  into  the
          wall  space containing the creature.  However, in order to attack
          an invisible creature in a wall, you must tunnel  into  the  wall
          containing  the creature.  If you just try to move into the wall,
          you will bump your head and look quite silly.
 
          If you are wielding a weapon, the damage for the weapon  is  used
          when  you  hit  a  creature.  Otherwise you get two fist strikes.
          Very strong creatures can do a lot of damage with their  fists...
          You  may  have  a primary weapon, and a secondary weapon which is
          kept on your belt or shoulder for immediate use.  You can  switch
          between your primary and secondary weapons with the exchange com-
          mand.  Be sure to wield the proper weapon when fighting.  Hitting
          a  dragon  over the head with a bow will simply make him mad, and
          get you killed.
 
          Missile weapons, such as bows,  can  be  wielded,  and  then  the
          proper  missile,  in  this case an arrow, can be fired across the
          room into a target.  Missiles can be used without the proper mis-
          sile  weapon,  but used together they have a greater range and do
          far more damage.
 
          Hits and misses are determined by ability  to  hit  versus  armor
          class.   A  hit  is a strike that does some damage; a miss may in
          fact reach a target, but fails to do any  damage.   Higher  armor
          classes make it harder to do damage, and so lead to more misses.
 
 
          8.1.  Monster Memories.
 
          There are hundreds of different creatures in the mines of  Angband,
          many  of which look the same on the screen.  The exact species of
          a creature can be discovered by looking at it.  It is  also  very
          difficult to keep track of the capabilities of various creatures.
          Rather than forcing you to keep notes, Angband automatically  keeps
          track  of  your  experiences with a particular creature.  This is
          called the monster memory.  You monster memory recalls  the  par-
          ticular  attacks  of  each creature (whether or not technically a
          monster) which you have suffered, as well  as  recalling  if  you
          have  observed  them  to  multiply  or  move erratically, or drop
          treasure, or many other attributes.
 
          If you have killed enough of a particular creature,  or  suffered
          enough attacks, recalling the monster memory may also provide you
          with information not otherwise available, such as a  armor  class
          or  hit dice.  These are not explained, but may be useful to give
          the relative danger of each creature.  This memory can be  passed
          on  to  a new character even after you die, by means of a reduced
          save file.
 
 
          8.2.  Your Weapon
 
          Carrying a weapon in your backpack does you no  good.   You  must
          wield  a  weapon  before  it can be used in a fight.  A secondary
          weapon can be kept by wielding it and  then  using  the  exchange
          command.   A  secondary  weapon is not in use, simply ready to be
          switched with the current weapon if needed.
 
          Weapons have two main characteristics, their ability to  hit  and
          their  ability  to  do  damage, expressed as `(+#,+#)'.  A normal
          weapon would be `(+0,+0)'. Many weapons in Angband  have  magical
          bonuses  to  hit  and/or do damage.  Some weapons are cursed, and
          have penalties that hurt the player.  Cursed  weapons  cannot  be
          unwielded until the curse is lifted.
 
          Angband assumes that your youth in the rough environment near the
          dungeons has taught you the relative merits of different weapons,
          and displays as part of their description the damage  dice  which
          define their capabilities.  The ability to damage is added to the
          dice roll for that weapon.  The dice used for a given  weapon  is
          displayed  as `#d#'.  The first number indicates how many dice to
          roll, and the second indicates how many sides they have.  A "2d6"
          weapon will give damage from 2 to 12, plus any damage bonus.  The
          weight of a weapon is also a consideration.   Heavy  weapons  may
          hit  harder,  but they are also harder to use.  Depending on your
          strength and the weight of the weapon, you may get  several  hits
          in one turn.
 
          Missile booster weapons, such as bows, have their characteristics
          added  to those of the missile used, if the proper weapon/missile
          combination is used.
 
          Although you receive any magical bonuses an  unidentified  weapon
          may possess when you wield it, those bonuses will not be added in
          to the displayed values of to-hit and to-dam  on  your  character
          sheet.   You must identify the weapon before the displayed values
          reflect the real values used.
 
          Finally, some rare weapons have  special  abilities.   These  are
          called  ego  weapons,  and  are feared by great and meek.  An ego
          sword must be wielded to receive benefit of its abilities.
 
          Special weapons are denoted by the following abbreviations:
 
          (Defender).
               A magical weapon that actually helps the wielder defend him-
               self,  thus increasing  his/her armour class, and protecting
               him/her against damage from fire,  frost,  acid,  lightning,
               and falls.  This weapon also will increase your stealth, let
               you see invisible creatures, protect you  from  paralyzation
               attacks, and help you regenerate hit points and mana faster.
               As a result of the regeneration ability,  you  will  use  up
               food faster than normal while wielding such a weapon.
 
          Weapon of Frost.
               A magical weapon of ice that delivers  a  cold  critical  to
               creatures  not  immune to  cold. It  will inflict thrice the 
               normal damage when used against such a creature creature. It
               also defends you against Cold.
 
          Weapon of Flame.
               A magical weapon of fire that delivers a  heat  critical  to
               creatures  not  immune to  fire.  It will inflict thrice the 
               normal damage when used against such a creature creature. It
               also defends you against Fire.
 
          Weapon of Westernesse.
               A Weapon of Westernesse is one of the more powerful weapons.
               It slays orcs,  increases your strength, dexterity, and con-
               stitution.   It also  lets you  see invisible  creatures and
               protects from  paralyzation.  These blades  were made by the
               Dunedain.

          (Blessed Blade).
               A  blessed  blade will increase your wisdom.   If  you are a
               a priest,  wielding a non-blessed  sword or polearm causes a
               small penalty while attacking.

          (Holy Avenger).
               A Holy Avenger is one of the more powerful  of  weapons.   A
               Holy  Avenger  will  increase  your  wisdom and your  armour
               class.  This weapon will do extra damage when  used  against
               evil, demonic and undead creatures, and will also  give  you 
               the ability to see invisible  creatures.   These weapons are
               more powerful versions of Blessed Blades.
 
          Weapon of Dragon Slaying.
               A Slay Dragon weapon is a special purpose weapon whose  sole
               intent  is  to  destroy  dragon-kind.   Therefore, when used
               against a dragon, the amount of damage done  is three  times
               the normal amount.
 
          Weapon of Slay Evil.
               A Slay Evil weapon is a special purpose  weapon  whose  sole
               intent  is  to destroy all forms of evil.  When used against
               an evil creature, either alive or undead,  the  damage  done
               twice the normal  amount.   Some of these  weapons are  also
               Blessed Blades.
 
          Weapon of Slay Animal.
               A Slay Animal weapon is a special purpose weapon whose  sole
               intent is to destroy all the dangerous animals in the world.
               An animal is any creature natural to the  world.   Therefore
               an  orc  would not be an animal, but a giant snake would be.
               This will inflict twice the normal  amount  of  damage  when
               used against an animal.
 
          Weapon of Slay Undead.
               A Slay Undead weapon is a special purpose weapon whose  sole
               intent  is  to  destroy all forms of undead.  This weapon is
               hated and feared by the intelligent  undead,  for  a  single
               blow  from  this  weapon will inflict three times the normal
               amount of damage.  This weapon also gives you the ability to
               see  invisible creatures, which is especially useful against
               undead, since many of them are normally invisible.   Some of
               these weapons have the additional ability to protect against
               the   life-draining  attacks  that  many  undead   creatures
               possess.
 
          Weapon of Slay Orc.
               A Slay Orc weapon does treble  damage  against  anything  of 
               orcish-kind.  Often these are elvish blades.
 
          Weapon of Slay Troll.
               A Slay Troll weapon does treble damage against  anything  of 
               troll-kind.  Often these are elvish blades.
 
          Weapon of Slay Giant.
               A Slay Giant weapon does treble damage against  anything  of 
               giant-humanoidal form.
 
          Weapon of Slay Demon.
               A Slay Demon weapon does treble damage against  anything  of 
               of Hellish nature such as the Minor and Major Demons.
 
          Whips of Fire.
               These are one of the balrogs'  favorite  weapons  delivering 
               heat criticals.
 
          Weapon of Morgul.
               These blades are so foully cursed with evil, it is  rumored
               impossible to remove them.  BEWARE!
 
          Apart from these there are some very rare, and well  made  blades
          in the dungeon with not necessarily any special abilities. These
          include:
                  Blades of Chaos (6d5)
                  Maces of Disruption (4d10)
                  Scythes of Slicing (8d4)
 
 
          8.3   Artifact Weapons
 
          During you childhood, you heard many rumors of unique weapons of   
          great or terrible deeds, here are some that you remember...
 
          The Longsword 'Ringil' (4d5) (+22,+25)
               The  Sword of Fingolfin (High-Elf).  When  wielded  it  will
               haste its wielder.  It is a blade of such deathly  cold that 
               it shines bright white  acting  as  a  permanent  light  and 
               delivering  cold criticals.  It slays evil,  demons,  undead
               and trolls.  Allows you to resist cold, regenerate mana  and  
               hit points more quickly with no extra food consumption. Also
               lets you see invisible and be immune to paralyzation.  Being
               made of white eog, it is capable of casting Ice Storms.
 
          The Longsword 'Anduril' (2d5) (+10,+15) [+5]
               The  Sword of Aragorn  the  Dunadan  Ranger  and  King.   It 
               increases your  strength  to  match  true  Kingly  strength,
               increases  armour class by +5. Being the 'Flame of the West'
               it delivers  heat criticals and defends  against  fire.   It 
               slays  evil, orcs and trolls. It allows you to see invisible
               and avoid paralyzation. So near to the element  fire  is the
               blade, that  Fire  Balls  can  be  cast  from  its   searing
               surface.
 
          The Lead-filled Mace 'Grond' (10d8) (+5,+25)
               The Hammer  of  the  Underworld,  this  is  Morgoth's  chief
               weapon. It weighs so much that it  slows  anything  of  less
               than godly status. It is so awesome that it  aggravates  all  
               that see it. It makes it's wielder see all and  resist  all.
               It slays all of Morgoths personal creations of orcs, trolls,
               and demons and it executes  dragons  doing five times normal
               damage against them, (it can kill all but a very few dragons
               in one mighty blow!).   Plus it causes impact criticals that 
               cause  earthquakes and it can  tunnel  through solid granite
               walls!
 
          The Two-Handed Sword 'Gurthang' (3d6) (+13,+17)
               This Iron of  Death  belonging  to  Turin  Turambar, made of 
               black eog, was designed to slay Dragons (and Trolls),  doing
               five times normal damage against dragons. It gives  you  the 
               strength to wield it, regenerates your  hit  points and mana 
               at no extra cost and allows you to be free of paralyzation.
 
          The Two-Handed Sword 'Mormegil' (3d6) (-40,-60)
               This evil black sword is heavily cursed, slowing its wielder
               and aggravating all that see it...
 
          The Broadsword 'Arunruth' (2d5) (+20,+12)
               This Sword of Accuracy  rarely  misses.  It  increases  the
               wielders dexterity, saves from falls, slays orcs and demons,
               and protects from paralyzation.
 
          The Broadsword 'Glamdring' (2d5) (+10,+15)
               This High-Elven sword (mate to Orcrist) was made during foul
               orc wars of long ago. It was once  wielded  by  Gandalf  the
               Grey Wizard. It slays orcs and  other  evil, shining  bright 
               red continuously, which aids  searching  and decreases  food  
               consumption. Its element is flame, and it gives   resistance
               to flame to the wielder, and slays those who have not.
 
          The Broadsword 'Orcrist' (2d5) (+10,+15)
               This High-Elven sword (mate to Glamdring)  was  made  during
               foul orc wars of long ago.  It was once  wielded  by  Thorin 
               Oakenshield the Dwarf-King-Under-the-Mountain. It slays orcs 
               and  other  evil,  shining  bright white continuously, which
               decreases food consumption, plus  making  the  wielder  more 
               stealthy. Being of the element frost, it protects from cold,
               and slays non-cold based creatures.
 
          The Broadsword 'Aeglin' (2d5) (+12,+16)
               This High-Elven sword, is the long, lost and forgotten third
               mate to Orcrist and Glamdring. It is also the most powerful.
               Like Glamdring and Orcrist, made  during  the  Orc-wars,  it 
               slays Orcish-kind, shining  bright  blue continuously, which
               decreases food consumption and aiding  searching.  Being  of
               electric element, it delivers lightning criticals, which  it
               also defends against.
 
          The Long Bow 'Belthronding' (+20,+22) (+3)
                This Noldorin black-yew bow, belonged to the greatest elven
                archer, Beleg Cuthalion, who was slain by his own blade, by
                his best friend Turin Turumbar. The bow  increases  stealth 
                and dexterity, and rarely missed its target.
 
          The Long Bow of Bard (+17,+19)
                This bow of men gives free action and increased dexterity.
 
          The Light Crossbow 'Cubragol' (+10,+14)
                This amazing bow of fire hastes its  wielder  and  brands
                all bolts with its element.
 
          The Bastard Sword 'Calris' (3d4) (-20,+20)
               This sword of Lungorthin the Balrog of White  Flame,  is  an
               evil cursed sword that needs great mastering to control  its
               powers. If mastered it can execute dragons, slay other  evil
               including demons and trolls, this naturally aggravates them.
               Also it gives its wielder far greater internal constitution.
 
          The Spear 'Aeglos' (1d20) (+15,+25) [+5]
               This  Snow-thorn of Gil-Galad the  High-Elf,  delivers  very
               deep cold-criticals, while  protecting  you  from  cold  and
               increasing  your armour class.  Being  elvish  it  naturally 
               slays orcs and trolls. It  increases  the  wielders  wisdom, 
               slows their digestion and frees their actions  from  holding
               forces of evil, also casting Frost Balls occasionally.
 
          The Spear 'Nimloth' (1d6) (+11,+13) (+3 to stealth)
               This elven spear, branded with frost, allows  its  wielder
               to creep up on the Undead and Slay them.
 
          The Dagger 'Angrist' (2d5) (+10,+15) [+5]
               This Iron-cleaver of Beren the Edain, increases and sustains
               dexterity, increases you protection,  prevents  paralyzation
               and slays orcs and trolls.
 
          The Small sword 'Sting' (1d6) (+7,+8)
               This  small weapon is  one of the  most powerful weapons  of 
               Westernesse.   Once wielded by Bilbo and Frodo  Baggins  (of
               Hobbit kind),  Sting slays undead,  evil, and orcs and  also 
               shines a continuous, bright blue. It increases the wielder's
               physical statistics  and  its piercing blue light  lights up 
               those normally invisible to sight.
 
          The Great Axe of Durin (4d4) (+10,+20) [+15]
               This  Wonderful  Dwarven  Axe was once  wielded by Durin the 
               Deathless (Father  and  King  of  the  Dwarves),  gives  its 
               wielder  high protection, executes dragons, while  resisting
               fire and acid.  It slays  demons,  trolls  and  orcs,  frees
               action and increases constitution.
 
          The War Hammer of Aule (5d5) (+19,+21) [+5]
               This is the great war hammer of the deity,  Aule  the Smith.
               Forged in his great furnaces  it  delivers  Shock  criticals
               causing five times normal damage to those not  resistant  to
               this element, and even then it executes dragons, slays evil,
               demons and undead. It resists fire, cold, acid and lightning
               and allows you to see invisible and be free of paralyzation.
               It increases its wielder's wisdom  so  that  one may  choose 
               wisely what to slay with it.  Truly an awesome weapon.
 
          The Two-Handed Great Flail 'Thunderfist' (3d6) (+5,+18)
               This weapon of Electricity and  Flame,  delivers  shock  and
               heat criticals, delivering five times or three times  normal
               damage against the respective types of creatures, also slays
               animals, trolls and orcs.  It also gives the  wielder  great
               strength.
 
          The Morningstar 'Bloodspike' (2d6) (+8,+22)
               This Bloody weapon slays animals, trolls, and orcs.  It allows
               you to see invisible creatures, as well as giving the wielder  
 
               great strength.
 
          The Quarterstaff 'Nar-i-vagil' (1d10) (+10,+20)
               This fiery staff slays animals and resists fire, doing times
               fire criticals. It also increases the wielders intelligence.
 
          The Blade of Chaos 'Doomcaller' (5d8) (+18,+28)
               This deadly blade  calls  doom  to  all  who  see  it,  this 
               naturally aggravates them. It shows you  wherever a creature
               is,  be  it  invisible  or  blocked  by  a  wall. It resists
               all elements and executes dragons, slays evil,  animal,  orc
               and troll. It delivers cold criticals, but severely  impedes
               its wielders health.
 
          The Three Daggers, 'Narthanc', 'Nimthanc', 'Dethanc' (1d4) (+4,+2)
               These elemental daggers  of  flame,  frost, and  electricity
               respectively do  their    elemental  criticals,  and  defend  
               against them.  They also cast bolts of their element often.
 
          The Dagger of Rilia (2d4) (+4,+3)
               This ancient, and poisonous  dagger  casts  stinking  clouds
               with great frequency.
 
          The Dagger 'Belangil' (3d2) (+6,+9)
               This nimble weapon of cold increases the wielder's dexterity
               and regeneration, while slowing  digestion.  Being  of  dark 
               origins it see alls invisible and casts frost balls.
 
          The Battle Axe of Balli Stonehand (3d6) (+8,+11) [+5]
               This Dwarvish Battle axe protects from elements,  falls  and
               the invisible. It slays all demons, trolls and orcs,  giving
               even dwarves the stealth, strength and  constitution  to  do
               so, never letting holding spells affect its  use in a fight.
 
          The Battle Axe 'Lotharang' (2d8) (+4,+3)
               This petty-dwarvish axe, slays orcs and  trolls,  increasing
               strength and dexterity. For those of  faint  heart  it  also
               cures medium wounds and cuts.
 
          The Morningstar 'Firestar' (2d6) (+5,+7) [+2]
               This weapon of flame casts fire balls.
 
          The Quarterstaff 'Eriril' (1d10) (+3,+5)
               This staff of people who believe in the power of  mind  over
               matter, greatly increases wisdom and intelligence and  gives
               the power to identify. It also sees  invisible and slays all
               evil.
 
          The Longsword 'Elvagil' (2d5) (+2,+7)
               This joyful sword increases dexterity, charisma and stealth.
               It protects from falls and the invisible, and slays orcs and
               trolls.
               
          The Glaive of Pain (8d6) (+0,+28)
               This weapon is designed to cause pain  to  anything  without 
               discrimination.
 
          The Lance of the Eorlingas (2d12) (+3,+21)
               This heavy lance is suprisingly easy  to  control,  allowing 
               slaughter of orcs, trolls and other evil (visible or not).
 
          The Broad Axe 'Barukkheled' (2d6) (+13,+19)
               This beautiful axe slays orcs, trolls, giants and other evil
               (visible or not),  while  greatly  increasing  the  wielders
               internal contesitude.
 
          The Trident of Wrath (4d9) (+21,+24)
               This extremely heavy and dangerous trident belonging to  the
               greatest Maiar spirit,  Osse,  slaughters  evil  and  undead
               without mercy wherever they hide, and increases the wielder's
               strength and dexterity.
 
          The Scimitar 'Haradekket' (2d5) (+9,+11)
               This sword of the south slays the invisible undead, evil and
               animals, and increases the wielder's dexterity. In addition,
               the  magically enhanced  blade  is  rumored  to  give  extra 
               attacks in combat.
 
          The Lochaber Axe 'Mundwine' (3d8) (+12,+17)
               This strong friend in battle, slays  evil  and  resists  the 
               elements.
 
          The Cutlass 'Gondricam' (1d7) (+10,+11)
               This defender increases the wielders dexterity.
 
          The Sabre 'Careth Asdriag' (1d7) (+6,+8)      
               This  lightning-quick blade  slays dragons,  giants, trolls,
               orcs, and animals.
 
          The Rapier 'Forasgil' (1d6) (+12,+19)
               This glittering ice-blade also  slays  animals  as  well  as 
               lighting the way.
 
          The Executioner's Sword 'Crisdurian' (4d5) (+18,+19)
               This executer slays evil, invisible undead, dragons,  giants
               orcs and trolls.
 
          The Flail 'Totila' (2d9) (+6,+8) (+2)
               This flaming flail slays evil  in  stealth.  It  also  casts 
               confusion.
 
          The Short sword 'Gilettar' (1d7) (+3,+7)
               This roguish sword  gives  better  regeneration  and  slower
               digestion, slaying all animals with uncanny speed.
 
          The Katana 'Aglarang' (6d8) (+0,+0)
               This super-light and sharp  katana   greatly  increases  the
               wielders dexterity and sustains it. Rarely does the  wielder
               get less than four attacks a round with  it,  and  often  as
               many as six!
 
          
        
          8.4.  Body and Shield Bashes
 
          Weight is the primary factor in being able to bash something, but
          strength plays a role too.  After bashing, a character may be off
          balance for several rounds depending upon his dexterity.
 
          Doors can be broken down by bashing them.  Once a door is  bashed
          open, it is forever useless and cannot be closed.
 
          Chests too may be bashed open, but be warned  that  the  careless
          smashing  of  a  chest  often ruins the contents.  Bashing open a
          chest will not disarm any traps it may contain,  but  does  allow
          the strong and ignorant to see what is inside.
 
          Finally, a creature may be bashed.   If  a  shield  is  currently
          being  worn,  the  bash is a shield bash and will do more damage.
          In either case, a bash may throw an opponent off  balance  for  a
          number of rounds, allowing a player to get in a free hit or more.
          If the player is thrown off balance, his opponent  may  get  free
          hits on him.  This is a risky attack.
 
 
          8.5.  Your Armour Class
 
          Armor class is a number that describes the amount and the quality
          of armour being worn. Armour class will generally run from  about
          0 to 150, but could become negative  or  greater  than  150  with
          rarer armour or by magical means.
 
          The larger your armor class, the more protective it is.  A  nega-
          tive armour  class  would  actually  help  get  you  hit.  Armour 
          protects you in three manners. One, it makes you harder to be hit
          for damage. A hit for no damage is the same as a miss.  Two, good
          armor will absorb some of the damage that  your  character  would
          have  taken. An armour class of 30 would absorb 15% of any damage
          meant for him.  Three, acid damage is  reduced  by  wearing  body
          armor.   It is obvious that a high armor class is a must for sur-
          viving the lower levels of Angband.
 
          Each piece of armour has an armour class adjustment, and  magical
          bonus.  Armour  bought  in  town will have these values displayed
          with their description. Armour that is found within  the  dungeon
          must  be  identified  before these values will be displayed.  All
          armor always has the base armour class displayed,  to  which  the
          bonus is added.  It is always possible to figure this out anyway,
          by watching the effect it has on your displayed armour class.
 
          Armor class values are always displayed between a set of brackets
          as  `[#]' or `[#,+#]'.  The first value is the armor class of the
          item.  The second number is the magical bonus of the  item  which
          is only displayed if known, and will always have a sign preceding
          the value.  There are a few cases where the form `[+#]' is  used,
          meaning the object has no armor class, only a magical armor bonus
          if worn.
 
          Some pieces of armor will possess special  abilities  denoted  by
          the following abbreviations:
 
          of Resist Acid.
               A character using such an object will take  only  one  third
               normal  damage  from any acid thrown upon him.  In addition,
               armor so enchanted will resist the acid's effects and not be
               damaged by it.
 
          of Resist Cold.
               A character using a resist cold object will  take  only  one
               third damage from frost and cold.
 
          of Resist Fire.
               A character using a resist fire object will  take  only  one
               third damage from heat and fire.
 
          of Resist Lightning.
               A character using a resist lightning object will  take  only
               one third damage from electrical attacks.
 
          of Resistance.
               A character wearing armor with this ability will have resis-
               tance  to  Acid,  Cold,  Fire, and Lightning as explained in
               each part above.
 
          Armour of Elvenkind.
               Same as Resistance armour, only generally  better  made  and 
               makes you more stealthy.  They may possess additional resis-
               tances, as well.
 
          Robes of the Magi.
               These robes are  designed  especially  for  wizards,  giving
               Resistance, sustaining all stats and  protecting  from  life
               level loss.  Like the Armour of Elvenkind,  these Robes also
               may possess additional resistances.
 
          Dragon Scale Mails.
               These extremely rare pieces of armour come in many different
               colours, each protecting you against the  relevent  coloured
               dragons. Naturally they are all resistant  to  acid  damage.
               They  also  occasionally  allow  you to breathe  as a dragon 
               would!
 
          Apart from these there are some very rare, and well  made armours
          in the dungeon with not necessarily any special abilities. These
          include:
                Shields of Deflection [10]
                Shadow Cloaks [6]
                Adamantite Plate Mail [40]
                Mithril Plate Mail [35]
                Mithril Chain Mail [28]
          The last three all resist acid due to  the  quality  metals  they 
          contain.
          
 
          8.6  Artifact Armours
 
          During your childhood, you heard many rumors of unique armours of   
 
          great   protection   and   abilities,  here  are  some  that  you 
          remember...
 
          Adamantite Plate Mail 'Soulkeeper' [40,+20]
               This amazing armour protects your soul from cold,  and  from
               life level loss. It is also capable of fully healing you.
 
          The Pair of Hard Leather Boots of Feanor [3,+20]
               These amazing boots belonging to Feanor the High-Elf,  haste
               the wearer permanently and temporarily in combat, making him
               or her stealthy as well.
 
          The Pair of Soft Leather Boots 'Dal-i-thalion' [3,+15]
               These amazing  boots  of  agility,  ensure  free  action  in 
               combat, greatly increasing your dexterity and ensuring  that
               you will never become less agile. It is said that  they  can 
               also make you more confident and brave.
  
          Full Plate Armour of Isildur [25,+25]
               This armour of the Dunedain Lord, Isildur, Resists.
 
          The Large Metal Shield of Anarion [5,+20]
               This shield Resists and sustains your stats.
 
          The Set of Cesti of Fingolfin (+10,+10) [5,+20]
               These amazing gauntlets increase the wearers dexterity, and
               slay creatures at (+10,+10). They will never be stopped  by
               paralyaztion and they also resist damage. They occasionally
               grow magical spikes that can be fired causing great damage.
 
          The Set of Leather Gloves 'Cambeleg' (+5,+5) [1,+15] 
               These Gloves of Might, increase strength and  constitution.
               They never allow their wearer to  be  paralyzed,  and  help 
               his/her slaying abilities.
 
          The Set of Leather Gloves 'Cammithrim' [1,+10]
               These Gloves of Light, sustain dexterity and give off light
               so brightly  that  they  can  cast  magic  missiles  almost 
               endlessly.
 
          The Set of Gauntlets 'Paurhach' [2,+15]
               These Fists of Fire resist fire and can cast fire bolts.
 
          The Set of Gauntlets 'Paurnimmen' [2,+15]
               These Fists of Frost resist cold and can cast frost bolts.
 
          The Set of Gauntlets 'Pauraegen' [2,+15]
               These Fists of Lightning  resist  lightning  and  can  cast 
               lightning bolts.
 
          The Set of Gauntlets 'Paurnen' [2,+15]
               These Fists of Water resist acid and can cast acid bolts.
 
          The Set of Gauntlets 'Camlost' (-11,-12) [2,+0] (-5)
               The Empty Hand aggravates  monsters,  and  greatly  reduces
               fighting ability.  Named after the empty hand of Beren that
               once clasped a Silmaril.
 
          Mithril Chain Mail of Belegennon [28,+20]
               This Chain Mail Resists and makes you stealthy.
 
          The Iron Helm of Dor-Lomin [5,+20]
               This is the Dragon Helm of  Turin Turumbar.  It is  rumored
               that its wearer will never die in combat.   It  resists all
               and sees all, and increases all fighting stats.
 
          The Iron Helm of Holhenneth [5,+10]
               This helm of brilliance and vision, greatly increases  your
               mental prowess. It allows you to see all  that  is  hidden,
               casting detection spells at frequent intervals.
 
          The Iron Helm of Gorlim [5,+10] (-125)
               This unhappy helm of betrayal ruins thought and sight.
 
          Soft Leather Armour 'Hithlomir' [4,+20] (+4)
               This dark-misty leather resists the elements and melds  the
               wearer into the background with incredible stealth.
 
          Leather Scale Mail 'Thalkettoth' (+3) [11,+25]
               This  light  leather  scale mail  is  suprisingly  good  at
               dodging attacks, and is resistant to acid.  Often nicknamed
               Blade-Turner.
 
          Chain Mail of Arvedui [14,+15]
               This wonderful chain mail belonged  to  the  last  king  of  
               Arnor. It resists the elements and increases  strength  and
               charisma.
 
          The Hard Leather Cap of Thranduil [2,+10]
               This acid resistant leather is a thinker's cap.  Increasing
               wisdom and intelligence it also gives telepathy.
 
          The Metal Cap of Thengel [3,+12]
               This cap of the Rohan King Thengel, gives kingly wisdom and
               charisma.
 
          The Steel Helm 'Hammerhand' [6,+20]
               This warriors' helm increases the fighting stats.
 
          The Large Leather Shield of Celefarn [4,+20]
               A quality shield of Resistance.
 
          The Pair of Metal Shod Boots of Thror [6,+20]
               These Dwarf-king boots are  ideal  for  combat,  increasing
               strength and constitution.
 
          The Cloak 'Colluin' [1,+15]
               This cloak of resistance even casts extra resistance spells
               that can defend against poison.
 
          The Cloak 'Holcolleth' [1,+4]
               This mage cloak increases intelligence and wisdom and casts
               spells to make monsters lose their concentration  and  fall
               to sleep.
 
          The Cloak 'Colannon' [1,+15]
               This Gate-cloak, teleports the player at  will,  and  gives 
               stealth so as to avoid awkward situations.
 
          8.7.  Crowns
 
          Some crowns also have special magical abilities that improve your
          chances in a battle.
 
          Crown of Might
               This is the great crown of the warriors.   The  wearer  will
               have  an increased strength, dexterity, and constituion, and
               will also be immune to any foe's attempt to slow or paralyze
               him or her.
 
          Crown of the Magi
               This is the great crown of the wizards.    The  wearer  will
               have  an  increased  intelligence,  and  will  also be given
               resistance against fire, frost, acid, and lightning.
 
          Crown of Lordliness
               This is the great crown of the  priests.   The  wearer  will
               have an increased wisdom and charisma.
 
          Crown of Seeing
               This is the great crown of the rogues.  The wearer  will  be
               able  to  see  even  invisible  creatures,  and will have an
               increased ability to locate traps and secret doors.
 
          Crown of Regeneration
               This crown will help you regenerate hit points and mana more
               quickly  than  normal,  allowing  you to fight longer before
               needing to rest.  You will use of food  faster  than  normal
               while   wearing  this  crown  because  of  the  regenerative
               effects.
 
          Crown of Beauty
               This  crown  looks  impressive,  and  will   increase   your
               charisma, but is otherwise not useful.
 
          The Iron Crown of Beruthiel [0,+20] (-125)
               This crown once belonged to the  Cat-Queen  of  Gondor,  who
               disdained armed combat. Giving  you  cat  like  vision,  and 
               sight within sight, it allows  its  wearer  to  be  free  of 
               combat, and infact finding armed combat beyond  his  or  her
               means.
 
          The Iron Crown of Morgoth
               This awesome artifact is a plain iron  crown,  mounted  with
               three jewels that encapture the eternal light of  the  Trees
               of the Valar, Teleperion and Laurelein.  These  Jewels  were 
               made by the Noldorian High-Elf, Feanor who  named  them  the  
               Silmarils.  Their  beauty,  unsurpassed, drove  Morgoth   to
               steal these jewels (with the aid of Ungoliant the  Unlight).
               The  crown  then, maximizes all you stats, sustains all your  
               stats, it is a permanent light source and allows  the wearer
               to see all.
 
          9.  Objects Found In The Dungeon
 
          The mines are full of objects just waiting to be  picked  up  and
          used.   How did they get there?  Well, the main source for useful
          items are all the foolish adventurers  that  proceeded  into  the
          dungeon  before  you.  They get killed, and the helpful creatures
          scatter the various treasure throughout the dungeon.  Most cursed
          items  are placed there by the joyful evil sorcerers, who enjoy a
          good joke when it gets you killed.
 
          You pick up objects by moving on top of them.  You can  carry  up
          to 22 different items in your backpack while wearing and wielding
          many others.  Although you are limited to 22 different items, you
          may be carrying several items of each kind restricted only by the
          amount of weight your character can carry.  Your weight limit  is
          determined  by your strength.  Only one object may occupy a given
          floor location, which may or may not also contain  one  creature.
          Doors, traps, and staircases are considered objects for this pur-
          pose.
 
          If you try to carry more weight than your limit,  you  will  move
          more  slowly  than  normal  until  you drop the extra weight.  If
          picking up an object would take you over your weight limit,  then
          you will be asked whether you really want to pick it up.  It is a
          good idea to leave the object alone if you  are  fleeing  from  a
          monster.
 
          Many objects found within the dungeon have special  commands  for
          their  use.   Wands  must  be Aimed, staves must be Used, scrolls
          must be Read, and potions must be Quaffed.  In any case, you must
          first  be  able  to  carry an object before you can use it.  Some
          objects, such as chests, are very complex.  Chests contain  other
          objects  and  may  be  trapped,  and/or locked.  Read the list of
          player commands carefully for a further understanding of chests.
 
          One item in particular will be discussed  here.   The  scroll  of
          "Word  of  Recall"  can be found within the dungeon, or bought at
          the temple in town.  It acts in two manners, depending upon  your
          current  location.   If read within the dungeon, it will teleport
          you back to town.  If read in town, it  will  teleport  you  back
          down to the deepest level of the dungeon one which your character
          has previously been.  This makes the scroll very useful for  get-
          ting  back  to  the  deeper levels of Angband.  Once the scroll has
          been read it takes a while for the spell to act, so don't  expect
          it to save you in a crisis.
 
          The game provides some automatic inscriptions to  help  you  keep
          track  of  your possessions.  Wands and staves which are known to
          be empty will be inscribed with "empty".  Objects which have been
          tried  at  least  once,  but  haven't been identified yet will be
          inscribed  with  "tried".   Cursed  objects  are  inscribed  with
          "cursed".   Also,  occasionally you will notice that something in
          your inventory or equipment list seems to be magical.  High level
          characters  are  much  more  likely to notice this than beginning
          characters.  When you do notice this, the item in  question  will
          be inscribed with "blessed" or "cursed" as is  relevant.  Priests
          acquire this  ability  far  more  readily  than  other  character 
          classes.
                
          It is rumored that  rings of power and  extra  rare  spell  books
          may be found deeper in the dungeon...
 
          And lastly, a final warning: not all objects are what they  seem.
          Skeletons  lying  peacefully about the dungeon have been known to
          get up...
        
 
          9.1. Special Objects
 
          There are some strange and powerful objects that can be found  in 
          the dungeons, here are some you seem to remember...
 
          The Amulet of Ingwe (+3)
                This amulet belonged to the high king of  the  Vanyar,  the 
                most powerful of the High Elves. It gives  resistance,  and
                greatly increases your wisdom and charisma.  It  gives  you
                good infravision, see invisible, and it casts a x5 strength
                dispel evil.
 
          The Amulet of Carlammas (+3)
                This fiery amulet protects from  flame,    casts protection
                from evil and increases your constitution.
 
          The Phial of Galadriel
                This wonderful object is an infinite light source, and once
                identified it can light up rooms. 
 
          The Three Elven Rings
                Made by Celebrimbor,  Elf  of  the  Girth-I-Mirdain.  These
                Rings of Power are of awesome power, and are very rare.
 
          The Ring of Power 'Narya' (+1)
                Celeborn gave this to Cirdan who gave it to Gandalf.
                The least powerful of the Elven  rings  is  of  the element 
                fire. And as such makes you completely immune to  fire.  It 
                is also capable of casting very  powerful  fire  balls.  It 
                increases all your stats by  one.  It  also  protects  from 
                from life draining and helps you regenerate.
 
          The Ring of Power 'Nenya' (+2)
                This was kept by Galadriel.
                As Narya is to fire, Nenya is to Frost... Plus two  to  all 
                your stats.
 
          The Ring of Power 'Vilya' (+3)
                This was kept by Gil-galad who gave it to Elrond.
                This gives immunity to lightning and poison.  Plus three to
                all your stats.  Casts very powerful lightning balls.
 
          Rumors exist of  a Ring of Power known as the One Ring, which was
          made  to master  the other Rings of Power.   Its  powers are what
          legends are made of....
 
 
          9.2.  Cursed Objects
 
          Some objects, mainly armor and weapons, have had curses laid upon
          them.   These  horrible  objects  will look like any other normal
          item, but will detract from your character's stats  or  abilities
          if  worn.   They will also be impossible to remove until a remove
          curse is done.  In fact some are so badly cursed  that even  this 
          will not work, and more potent methods are needed.
 
          If you wear or wield a cursed item,  you  will  immediately  feel
          something wrong.  The item will also be inscribed "cursed".
 
 
          9.3.  Mining
 
          Much of the treasure within the dungeon can be found only by min-
          ing  it  out  of  the walls.  Many rich strikes exist within each
          level, but must  be  found  and  mined.   Quartz  veins  are  the
          richest,  yielding the most metals and gems, but magma veins will
          have some hordes hidden within.
 
          Mining is virtually impossible without a pick or  shovel.   Picks
          and  shovels  have  an  additional  magical  ability expressed as
          `(+#)'.  The higher the number, the better  the  magical  digging
          ability of the tool.  A pick or shovel also has pluses to hit and
          damage, and can be used as a weapon.
 
          When a vein of quartz or magma is located, the  character  should
          wield  his  pick or shovel and begin digging out a section.  When
          that section is removed, he should locate another section of  the
          vein,  and  begin  the process again.  Since granite rock is much
          harder to dig through, it is  much  faster  to  follow  the  vein
          exactly  and  dig  around  the  granite.   There is an option for
          highlighting magma and quartz.
 
          If the character has a scroll or staff of treasure  location,  he
          can  immediately  locate  all  strikes  of treasure within a vein
          shown on the screen.  This makes mining much easier and more pro-
          fitable.
 
          It is sometimes possible to get a character  trapped  within  the
          dungeon  by  using  various magical spells and items.  So it is a
          very good idea to always carry some kind of  digging  tool,  even
          when you are not planning on tunneling for treasure.
 
 
          9.4.  Staircases, Secret Doors, Passages, and Rooms
 
          Staircases are the manner in which you get deeper, or  climb  out
          of  the  dungeon.  The symbols for the up and down staircases are
          the same as the commands to use them.  A  `<'  represents  an  up
          staircase  and  a `>' represents a down staircase.  You must move
          your character over the staircase before you can use them.
 
          Each level has at least one up staircase, and at least  two  down
          staircases.   There are no exceptions to this rule.  You may have
          trouble finding some well hidden secret doors, but the stairs are
          there.
 
          Many secret doors are used within  the  dungeon  to  confuse  and
          demoralize  adventurers  foolish  enough to enter.  But with some
          luck, and lots of concentration, you can find these secret doors.
          Secret  doors  will  sometimes  hide  rooms or corridors, or even
          entire sections of that level of  the  dungeon.   Sometimes  they
          simply hide small empty closets or even dead ends.
 
          Creatures in the dungeon will generally know and use these secret
          doors.   If  they  leave  one  open, you will be able to go right
          through it.  If they close it behind them you will have to search
          for  the  catch first.  Once a secret door has been discovered by
          you, it is drawn as a known door and no more  searching  will  be
          required to use it.
 
 
          10.  Winning The Game
 
          Once your character has progressed into killing dragons with  but
          a mean glance and snap of his fingers, he may be ready to take on
          Morgoth.  Morgoth will  appear on  some  levels  after level  99,
          so don't go down there until you are ready for him.
 
          Morgoth  cannot  be killed by some of the easier  methods used on
          normal creatures.  Because of Morgoth's cunning, he will teleport
          away to another level if a spell such as destruction is used upon
          him, and  Morgoth cannot be polymorphed, slept, charmed, or geno-
          cided.  Magical spells like Frost Ball are effective against him
          as are weapons, but he is difficult to kill and if allowed to escape
 
          for a time he will heal himself.
 
          If you should  actually survive the attempt of  killing  Morgoth,
          you  will  receive the status of WINNER.  Since you have defeated
          the toughest creature alive, your character is  ready  to  retire
          and  cannot  be  saved.   When  you quit the game, your character
          receives a surprise bonus score.
 
 
          11.  Upon Death and Dying
 
          If your character falls below 0 hit points, he has died and  can-
          not  be  restored.   A  tombstone  showing information about your
          character will be displayed.  You are also  permitted  to  get  a
          record  of  your  character,  and all your equipment (identified)
          either on the screen or in a file.
 
          Your character will leave behind a reduced save file, which  con-
          tains only the monster memory and your option choices.  It may be
          restored, in which case the new character is generated exactly as
          if  the file was not there, but the new player will find his mon-
          ster memory containing all the experience of past incarnations.
 
 
          12.  Wizards
 
          There are rumors  of Angband Wizards which, if  asked  nicely,  can
          explain  details  of  the  Angband  game  that  seem complicated to
          beginners.  The  newsgroup  rec.games.roguelike.angband is probably
          a good place to ask.
