New features in Angband 3.2.0
=============================

PLEASE READ THIS, EVEN IF YOU DON'T READ ANY OF THE REST:

There are some changes in this version to things that have remained 
unchanged for many years -

The AC system has been revised, so that heavy armour items offer a more 
proportionate amount of protection for their weight. This makes them 
more useful, but more expensive. (The concept of AC is unchanged: it 
makes you harder to hit and reduces the damage you take from physical 
attacks.) Those rare and special "dragonhide" armours are now more 
useful and more varied ...

In melee, the concept of "attacks per round" has changed. Attacks now 
cost a fixed amount of "energy", dependent on your stats, class and 
weapon. You still spend up to 100 energy attacking each turn, but unused 
energy will be carried over to your next turn. This will result in 
getting your next turn more quickly, when you have accumulated enough 
energy, and means your "blows per round" can be expressed as a fraction. 
In addition, you will stop your turn when you kill a monster and carry 
over your remaining energy to your next turn.

Resistances to fire, cold, acid and lightning will now reduce the 
chances of items in your backpack being destroyed by those elements.

Missiles with slays or brands are now slightly less awesomely effective: 
the multiplier from the slay/brand is added to the launcher multiplier, 
rather than multiplied by it. So a x3 bow with a x3 brand does x6 damage 
not x9. Missiles are still a competitive form of attack though.

There are now good reasons to try and clear monster pits and nests, 
other than the experience.

Artifacts are now instantly recognisable, but you will still need to 
find out what they do by trying them out or identifying them.

To reduce note-taking, you can now review the contents of the stores 
while you are in the dungeon. Note that this does not keep track of 
changes since you have left town, so the lists may be out-of-date by the 
time you return!

Storekeepers will offer occasional hints to young adventurers. After you 
gain a few levels, they will greet you without presuming to offer 
advice.

There is a new "no_selling" option. Storekeepers will still happily take 
items off your hands, but they will pay you nothing (though they will 
still ID unknown items for you, and they will still happily sell you 
their wares). Instead, gold found in the dungeon is increased in 
quantity. This is a birth option and must be set before or during 
character creation. If changed during a game, it will not take effect 
until the next game. Note that changed birth options do not take effect 
if you use the "quickstart" option (i.e. immediately start a new 
character based on the previous one). If you want to play with changed 
birth options, make sure you go right back to the start of the birth 
process (press 'N' at the quickstart screen, then '=' to edit birth 
options).

There is another new option, to display all "unique" monsters in a 
special (light purple) colour, so you can see at a glance that they are 
uniques. If you like the idea but don't like the colour, you can edit it 
by choosing "interact with colours".

There is yet another new option to make certain powerful monsters and 
items shimmer in real time (i.e. between keypresses).

If you play with graphical tiles, you can now make them bigger. There is 
also a new 8x16 tile set (thanks Nomad!).
